1
HIS EXCELLENCY	JOHN	DRAMANI	MAHAMA
PRESIDENT	OF	THE	REPUBLIC	OF	GHANA
STATE	OF	THE	NATION	2014
Tuesday,	25	February,	2014	
(1000	hours)
2
Right	Honourable	Speaker,
Your	Excellency,	the	Vice	President,
Your	Ladyship,	the	Chief	Justice,
Honourable	Members	of	Parliament,
Since	the	start	of	the	Fourth	Republic,	every	President,	in	fulfillment of	Article	67	of	the	
Constitution	of	the	Republic	of	Ghana,	has	stood	before	this	august	house	each	year	to	
address	the	state	of	our	nation.	It	is	my	privilege,	as	President,	to	also	stand	before	you	
today	to	present	a	message	on	the	state	of	the	nation.
I	am	pleased	to	be	addressing	the	full	house	today,	and	I	wish	to	thank	all	my	
parliamentary	colleagues	for	the	cooperation	you	have	continually	extended	to	me	since	I	
was	sworn	in	as	President.	As	a	former	Member	of	Parliament	for	twelve	(12)	years,	I	am	
always	filled	with	a	sense	of	nostalgia	anytime	I	step	onto	the	grounds	of	Parliament.
Mr.	Speaker,	we	find	ourselves	at	a	unique	place	in	history.	Our	beloved	Ghana	is	a	nation	
in	transition.	We	are	on	the	cusp	of	many	exciting	new	opportunities.	We	are	on	the	verge	
of	fulfilling	the	promises	our	forefathers	and	foremothers	made	to	us,	and	to	the	world,	
about	the	destiny	of	our	country	and	the	determination	of	our	people.
We	are	in	the	midst	of	change.	And	change	can	often	feel	uncomfortable,	especially	as	it	
pulls	us	away	from	the	systems	and	practices	with	which	we	have	become	familiar,	but	are	
no	longer	serving	our	needs	efficiently.	Without	change,	Mr.	Speaker,	Ghana	cannot	grow.	
Change	is	what	will	propel	us	forward,	as	a	nation,	to	all	that	lies	ahead.
And	these	new	opportunities	will	enable	us	to	transform	ourselves	from	a	lower	middleincome,
import-dependent,	developing	country	to	a	proud	and	robust,	self-sufficient	
middle-income	nation.
Mr.	Speaker,	we	have	been	here	before,	as	a	nation.	We	have	been	in	transition,	pushing	
our	way	past	doubt,	and	past	darkness,	to	find	the	dawn	of	a	new	day. Ghana	was	created	
through	change,	a	movement	of	the	people	in	support	of	their	collective	vision.	
3
And	then	Ghana	went	on	to	influence	change	on	the	African	continent	and	in	effect,	the	
course	of	the	world.
Mr.	Speaker,	last	year	in	my	first	State	of	the	Nation	Address,	I	defined	the	four	basic	pillars	
around which	my	approach	to	governance	and	socio-economic	transformation	would	
revolve.	They	are:	Putting	People	First;	Building	a	Strong	and	Resilient	Economy;	
Expanding	Infrastructure	for	Growth;	and,	Maintaining	Transparent	and	Accountable	
Governance.
Today, as	I	talk	about	where	we	are	as	a	nation,	I	also	want	to	talk	about	who	we	are	as	a	
nation.	I	want	to	talk	about	the	richness	and	diversity	of	our	talent	and	innovation.	I	want	
to	talk	about	the	strength	of	our	determination	as	a	people.		It	is	a	determination	that	has	
always	guided	us	toward	victory	in	all	of	our	endeavours.	
We	are	a	nation	of	24	million.	That’s	people	not	products.	24	million	human	lives,	each	one	
deserving	access	to	the	basic	necessities	of	life;	each	one	possessing	unique	ideas	and	skill	
sets	to	make	Ghana	better;	each	one	holding	more	value	to	this	country	in	its	existence	
and	potential	than	any	other	natural	resource	we	have.
Mr.	Speaker,	this	is	why	my	government’s	first	priority	is,	and	will	continue	to	be,	our	
people.	At	the	core	of	every	decision	we	make	and	every	policy	we	implement	is	the	
understanding	that	it	will	have	a	direct	and	positive	impact	in	the	day-to-day	lives	of	
average	Ghanaian	citizens.
PILLAR	I:		PUTTING	PEOPLE	FIRST
a.		Gender,	Children	and	Social	Protection
At	the	recent	World	Economic	Forum	in	Davos,	(Switzerland),	a	prominent	item	on	the	
agenda	was	the	topic	of	“inequality.”		Various	development	and	social	justice	
organizations	cited	it	as	one	of	this	decade’s	top	global	risks.	Inequality	among	nations,	as	
well	as	inequality	within	nations,	has	become	a	major	flashpoint	for	social	tension.	
Mr.	Speaker,	wealth	disparity	is	of	great	concern	to	my	government.	It	is	a	threat	to	our	
stability	as	a	nation	and	to	our	unity	as	a	people.	We	are	aiming	to	bridge	the	gap	between	
the	richest	and	poorest	of	our	people.	In	the	next	two	months,	here	in	Accra,	we	will	host	
a	major	international	conference	focusing	on	the	theme	of	growing	inequality	in	the	world.	
4
We	are	proud	to	be	hosting	this	conference,	and	we	are	eager	to	share	our	experiences	
with	the	rest	of	the	world,	and	also	gain	insight	from	the	other	conference	participants	
and	the	international	community-at-large.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	Ministry	of	Gender,	Children	and	Social	Protection	is	a	major	instrument	in	
our	effort	to	create	an	all-inclusive	society	in	which	the	weak	and	disadvantaged	also	have	
a	stake	in	our	nation’s	progress.	The	Ministry’s	primary	mandate	is	to	promote	the	welfare	
and	protection	of	children,	and	to	empower	the	vulnerable,	the	excluded,	the	aged,	and	
persons	living	with	disability,	and	to	ensure	true	gender	equality.		
A	lot	of	this	Ministry’s	work	involves	advocacy	and,	in	this	regard,	the	Ministry	has	actively	
been	involved	in	the	drafting	of	the	Affirmative	Action	Bill	and	the	Intestate	Succession	
and	Property	Rights	of	Spouses	Bills.	The	Ministry	also	initiated	the	process	for	the	
validation	of	the	Domestic	Workers	Regulation.		These	are	pieces	of	legislations	that	are	
key	to	protecting	the	rights	of	our	women	and	other	vulnerable	groups	in	our	society.
The	Ministry’s	flagship	programme,	however,	is	the	Livelihood	Empowerment	Against	
Poverty,	otherwise	known	as	LEAP.		Mr.	Speaker,	through	this	programme,	the	Ministry	
has	made	cash	grants	to	74,000	of	the	poorest	households	in	our	country. This	means	that	
now,	the	poorest	74,000	families	in	Ghana	will	be	able	to	afford	food,	clothing	and	the	cost	
of	basic	transportation.		Now,	these	families	will	have	access	to	healthcare	and	education;	
now,	these	families	can	even	invest	in	some	small	income-generating	activity.
This	year,	the	Ministry,	with	the	support	of	Government,	plans	to	increase	the	beneficiary	
families	of	LEAP	to	100,000.	In	2015	that	number	will	increase	to	150,000.	Currently	the	
Ministry	is	implementing	an	electronic	platform	to	deliver	the	grants	to	the	beneficiaries	
using	mobile	phones.	Mobile	devices	are	being	distributed	to	the	beneficiary	families	to	
enable	them	receive their	transfers.	With	those	mobile	devices	many	households	would	
also,	for	the	first	time,	be	able	to	connect	to	the	national	communication	network.
The	LEAP	programme	is	not	intended	to	be	a	source	of	long-term	support	to	the	same	set	
of	families.	The	purpose	of	these	cash	grants	is	to	empower	the	poor	and	the	vulnerable.	It	
is	to	create	opportunities	in	order	to	give	them	a	way	out	of	poverty.	The	programme	
ensures	that	the	most	impoverished	among	us	can	live	in	dignity.	It	offers	them	hope	in	
their	future	possibilities,	and	a	chance	to	participate	in	the	collective	future	of	our	nation.
5
Mr.	Speaker,	this	Ministry	is	especially	vigilant	when	it	comes	to	the	rights	and	protection	
of	our	children.	The	Ministry,	together	with	the	Domestic	Violence	and	Victims	Support	
Unit	[DOVVSU]	has	led	an	awareness	campaign	against	child	marriage.	As	a	result	of	this	
campaign,	they	have	successfully	extricated	numerous	children	forced	into	marriage	and	
returned	them	to	their	families	and	studies.
The	Ministry	has	also	provided	the	equipment	and	taken	tool	kits	to	twenty-five	(25)	
institutions	across	the	nation	to	facilitate	the	technical	and	vocational	training	of	young	
people.
Finally,	the	Ministry	for	Gender,	Children	and	Social	Protection,	convened	a	team	of	
doctors	to	perform	the	necessary	surgeries	on	women	with	obstetric	fistula	in	the	Upper	
East,	Upper	West,	Volta	and Central	regions.	In	addition	to	offering	these	women	relief	
from	the	pain	and	discomfort	of	this	childbirth	injury,	these	procedures	have	restored	their	
dignity	and	sense	of	self-worth.
Mr.	Speaker,	through	our	social	intervention	programmes	we	must	create	safety	nets	that	
protect	the	poor	and	vulnerable.	We	must	share	the	fruits	of	our	growth	equitably	in	order	
that	we	leave	no	one	behind.	This	is	the	way	we	can	guarantee	that	all	our	citizens	are	
committed	and	have	a	stake	in	the	survival	and	advancement	of	our	nation.	
b.		Health
Mr.	Speaker,	it	is	this	government’s	vision	to	extend	quality	health	care	to	all	our	people	
irrespective	of	one’s	status	in	society	or	geographical	location.	This	involves	the	
construction	of	new	facilities	and	the	training	of health	personnel.		
Healthy	people	make	a	healthy	nation.	All	around	the	world	it	is	recognised	that	the	costs	
and	consequences	of	illness	far	outweigh	the	cost	of	making	quality	healthcare	accessible	
and	affordable	to	all.
Mr.	Speaker,	to	this	end,	Government	is	pursuing	the	vision	of	bringing	healthcare	to	the	
doorsteps	of	our	people,	in	even	the	remotest	of	locations.		We	have	been	engaged	in	an	
aggressive	rollout	of	Community	Health	Improvement	Compounds	[CHPS].		The	
compounds	are	staffed	with	trained	nurses,	midwives,	and	other	auxiliary	health	
personnel.		They	are	located	in	rural	and	peri-urban	communities,	and	they	provide	basic	
healthcare	services	including	antenatal	care	to	pregnant	women.
6
These	compounds	have	greatly	increased	access	to	healthcare,	especially	in	deprived	
communities.	They	have	cut	down	the	distance	our	citizens	have	to	travel	to	access	
healthcare.		The	CHPS	compounds	are	also	playing	a	prominent	role	in	Ghana’s	steadily	
decreasing	maternal	mortality	numbers.	By	2016,	we	aim	to	construct	an	additional	1600	
new	CHPS	compounds	across	the	country.
To	support	this	wonderful	campaign,	my	colleagues	and	I	in	the	Executive	branch	of	
Government	have	taken	a	voluntary	ten	percent	(10%)	cut	in	salaries.	These	contributions	
will	be	used	to construct	more	CHPS	Compounds	so	that	we	can	save	the	lives	of	more	
women	during	childbirth.
Mr.	Speaker,	our	policy	is	to	provide	every	district	with	a	modern	health	facility.		The	newly	
constructed	Tarkwa	Hospital	has	been	equipped	and	is	now	open	for	use.		This	has	
improved	the	quality	of	health	for	people	in	that	catchment	area.	Work	is	ongoing	on	
twelve	(12)	new	district	hospitals,	including	Dodowa,	Sekondi,	Fomena	and	Garu-Tempane,	
while	financing	for	an	extra	nine	(9)	are	being	concluded.
Mr.	Speaker,	work	is	ongoing	on	a	new	teaching	hospital	for	the	University	of	Ghana.	
When	completed,	this	new	hospital	will	make	quality	tertiary	healthcare	readily	available.	It	
will	also	ease	the	pressure	on	the	Korle-Bu	Teaching	Hospital.	Work	is	ongoing	to	upgrade	
the	Ridge	Hospital	into	a	full-fledged	regional	hospital	to	serve	the	Greater	Accra	Region.
Work	on	the	Upper	West	Regional	Hospital	in	Wa	is	progressing	steadily.		Just	a	few	weeks	
ago	I	cut	the	sod	for	the	start	of	Phase	II	of	the	upgrading	and	expansion	of	the	Tamale	
Teaching	Hospital.	This	upgrading	has	made	the	Tamale	Teaching	Hospital	a	critical	
provider	of	tertiary	care	in	the	northern	sector.	
This	development	also	means	that	it	is	now	possible	for	medical	students	from	the	
University	for	Development	Studies	to	perform	their	clinicals	at	the	Tamale	Teaching	
Hospital,	instead	of	moving	to	the	Kwame	Nkrumah	University	of	Science	and	Technology	
in	Kumasi	to	complete	their	studies.	
Mr.	Speaker	in	this	age	of	modern	medicine,	in	order	to	best	serve patients,	our	healthcare	
facilities	must	maintain	equipment	that	is	state	of	the	art	and	in	good	working	order.	
Under	the	National	Medical	Equipment	Replacement	Programme,	modern	equipment	has	
been	supplied	to	forty	(40)	district	hospitals.	
7
Other	beneficiary	hospitals	are	the	Ridge,	Tema	General,	37	Military,	the	Princess Marie	
Louise	Children’s	Hospital,	as	well	as	Maamobi	General	Hospital.	There	were	three	teaching	
hospitals	that	also	benefitted- Tamale,	Komfo	Anokye,	and	Korle	Bu.
Mr.	Speaker,	Korle-Bu,	Ghana’s	premier	teaching	hospital,	benefitted	from	equipment	
supplies	and	rehabilitation	worth	276	million	Ghana	Cedis.		This	expenditure	covered	the	
paediatrics	theatre,	which	had	been	closed	for	more	than	8	years.		Children	are	now	able	
to	have	their	surgeries	in	a	beautifully	renovated	theatre	with	first	class	equipment.		
Additional	facilities	covered	by	the	expenditure	were	the	neonatal,	intensive	care	and	baby	
units;	the	mammography	centre,	as	well	as	the	laundry	and	kitchen.
We	are	currently	engaged	in	the	expansion	of	health	training	facilities.		More	Nursing	and	
Midwifery	Training	and	Medical	Assistants	Training	institutions	are	being	opened.		This	
means	that	more	skilled	personnel	are	being	graduated	to	serve	in	the	health	sector.		So	
far,	more	than	3,000	medical	personnel	have	been	trained.		These	include,	medical	
assistants,	midwives,	public	and	community	health	nurses.
The	net	result	of	this	additional	access	to	and	availability	of	health	personnel	is	reflected	in	
the	increasing	life	expectancy	ratio	in	Ghana,	which	currently	stands	at	about	65	years	-
among	the	highest	in	Sub-Saharan	Africa.		Another	positive	result	of	this	is,	the	drop	in	
institutional	neonatal	mortality	from	5.8	per	1000	live	births	in	2012	to	2.3	per	1000	today.		
The	average	neonatal	maternal	mortality	is	also	decreasing	steadily.		These	are	not	just	
numbers;	they	represent	human	lives.		These	improvements	mean	that	more	babies	are	
surviving	childbirth	and	more	mothers’	lives	are	being	saved.	
Mr.	Speaker,	when	it	comes	to	saving	lives,	Ghana	has	been	hugely	successful	in	its	efforts	
in	the	area	of	HIV	and	AIDS.		Our	prevalence	rate	for	HIV	and	AIDS	continues	to	decline	and	
currently	stands	at	1.37%.		The	Ghana	AIDS	Commission	continues	to	work	towards	
implementation	of	our	5-year	strategic	plan.		The	plan	envisions	a	50%	reduction	in	new	
infections	by	2015,	virtual	elimination	of	mother-to-child	transmission	and	the	placement	of	
more	infected	persons	on	antiretroviral	therapies.	We	will	mobilise	funding	for	a	massive	
scaling up	of	our	antiretroviral	therapy	programmes.
At	the	invitation	of	UNAIDS	I	attended	the	Lancet	Commission	Conference	of	HIV	and	AIDS	
in	London	(recently).		At	the	conference,	I	championed	the	cause	of	building	local	capacity	
in	the	African	Pharmaceutical industry	for	the	production	of	antiretroviral	therapies.		
8
Mr.	Speaker,	I	am	happy	to	announce	that	we	are	on	track	to	exceed	the	target	of	a	50%	
reduction	in	new	infections	by	2015.		We	are	also	leading	the	way	in	Sub-Saharan	Africa	
with	over	76%	reduction	in	new	HIV	infections	among	children.		
Despite	those	successes,	Mr.	Speaker,	there	are	key	populations	in	which	HIV	infections	
remain	much	higher	than	the	national	average.		Among	sex	workers	the	infection	rate	is	
11.3%.		It	has	dropped	significantly from	25%	in	2009,	but	it	still	remains	well	above	our	
target,	as	does	the	infection	rate	among	men	who	have	sex	with	men,	which	currently	
stands	at	17.5%.
Mr.	Speaker,	education	has	proven	to	be	the	most	effective	tool	in	the	battle	against	the	
spread	of HIV/AIDS.		The	awareness	that	is	gained	through	education	is	what	prompts	
people	to	alter	or	stop	engaging	in	behaviour	and	practices	that	place	them	at	greater	risk	
of	infection.		We	will	continue	our	public	awareness	campaigns,	specifically	ones	targeting	
those	populations	at	greatest	risk.
c.		Education
When	it	comes	to	education,	Mr.	Speaker,	government’s	top	areas	of	focus	are	quality,	
access,	and	affordability.	There	was	a	time	when	our	public	school	system	was	on	track	
and	on	par	with	the	private	schools	here	in	Ghana,	and	anywhere	else	in	the	world.		Where	
education	is	concerned,	we	have	a	history	of	being	quite	visionary.		
When	the	Prince	of	Wales	College,	which	later	became	Achimota,	was	established	in	1924	
as	a	co-educational	facility,	gender	equality	in	education	was	far	from	the	norm.		In	fact,	
most	women	the	world	over	did	not	even	have	the	right	to	vote	or	own	property.		But	in	
Ghana,	girls	and	young	women	were	being	educated	alongside	their	male	counterparts.		
And,	rightfully,	with	that	education	came	the	expectation	of	comparable	careers.		
When	the	commission	on	higher	education	in	the	British	colonies	recommended	that	a	
single	university	be	established	in	British	West	Africa	and	chose	Ibadan,	Nigeria	as	the	
location	of	that	university,	we	Ghanaians	challenged	their	decision.		We	understood	the	
value	of	education.		We	knew	what	the	presence	of	an	institution	of	higher	learning	would	
mean	to	our	people,	especially	to	the	future	generations.		
9
In	the	end	our	protest	was	successful	and	that	university	which	was	established	in	1948	as	
an	affiliate	of	the	University	of	London	is	now	none	other	than	our	esteemed	University	of	
Ghana.						
Mr.	Speaker,	we	must	make	education	a	priority	again.	The	students	of	this	nation	deserve	
to	have	the	confidence	that	comes	from	knowing	that	the	education	they	are	receiving	will	
adequately	prepare	them	to	navigate	this	competitive	global	workplace.	If	our	students	
are	left	behind,	then	we	as	a	nation	will	also	be	left	behind.
To	this	end,	Government	has	been	working	to	improve	the	quality	of	education,	especially	
at	the	basic	level.	The	main	problems	affecting	this	level	are	a	lack	of	teachers,	a	lack	of	
teaching	and	learning	materials,	and	poor	school	infrastructure	especially,	in	the	rural	
areas;	and,	also,	community	apathy	in	the	management	of	schools.
We	are	actively	engaged	in	the	process	of	building	new	school	blocks	to	replace	schools	in	
sub-standard	structures.	In	1,900	communities,	mostly	rural,	this	has	improved	the	
environment	in	which	children	learn	and	enabled	classes	to	be	held	all	year	round.	
In	urban	schools,	these	additional	facilities	have	enabled	Government	to	progressively	
eliminate	the	shift	system	that	had	children	attending	school	in	turns.	Science	resource	
centres	have	also	been	rehabilitated	across	the	country	to	facilitate	the	learning	of	science	
and	mathematics.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	availability	of	teachers	has	been	a	major	challenge.	Because	of	constraints	
of	paying	teacher	trainee	allowances,	Government	previously	imposed	quotas	on	
admissions	into	colleges	of	education.	Annual	admission	to	these	colleges	was	therefore	
restricted.	
With	the	recent	decision	to	transfer	teacher	trainees	onto	the	Students	Loan	Trust,	it	has	
made	it	possible	to	increase	the	number	of	trainees	in	the	colleges	of	education	from	the	
previous	9000	to	15000.	This	would	improve	the	supply	of	teachers	and	open	up	the	
opportunity	to	many	young	people	who	want	to	take	up	teaching	as	a	profession.
Unfortunately,	it	has	become	apparent	that	the	training	of	these	professionals	does	not	
always	translate	into	an	availability	of	teachers	in	certain	areas.		Mr.	Speaker,	I	am	
concerned,	and	we	all	must	be	concerned,	about	the	findings	from	a	national	staff	
rationalization	exercise	just	completed	by	the	Ministry	of	Education.		It	is	clear	that	we	
need	to	do	better	with	the	deployment	of	our	teachers.
10
The	current	situation	is	that	in	many	regions	there	is	an	excess	of	teachers	in	urban	and	
peri-urban	areas,	but	in	the	rural	and	other	deprived	communities,	teachers	are	often	in	
short	supply.		We	cannot	accept	this	educational	divide	between	our	urban	and	rural	
communities.
So,	Mr.	Speaker,	I	am	calling	for	nationwide	support	for	the	Education	Ministry	and	the	
Ghana	Education	Service	as	they	take	the	necessary	actions	to	implement	a	programme	
aimed	at	an	immediate	and	comprehensive	redeployment	and	redistribution	of	teachers.
It	is	very	important	that	all	Metropolitan,	Municipal	and	District	Chief	Executives,	as	well	as	
MPs	and	community	leaders	take	an	active	part	in	these	efforts	to	address	issues	of	
education	at	the	district	and	community	levels.		Together,	we	can	and	we	must	improve	
school	management,	performance	and	accountability	across	our	nation.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	lack	of	instructional	and	learning	materials	is	also	being	addressed	
through	the	supply	of	textbooks	and	exercise	books	to	children	in	public	schools	across	
the	country.	Through	this	programme,	more	than	12	million	books	have	been	distributed	to	
basic	schoolchildren	in	the	country,	thus	equipping	them	with	the	core	tools	they	require	
for	their	education.
While	Ghana	has	been	successful	in	achieving	the	Millennium	Development	Goals	(MDGs)	
on	universal	primary	education,	there	still	remain	pockets	where	school	enrolment	is	low.	
To	address	this,	Government	introduced	the	Complementary	Basic	Education	programme.	
This	programme	has	facilitated	teaching	and	learning	for	25,000	out-of-school	children.	
Classes	under	this	programme	are	ongoing	in	the	Upper	East,	Upper	West.	Northern	and	
Brong	Ahafo	Regions.		Now,	there	are	25,000	children	whose	choices	will	not	be	limited	by	
illiteracy;	25,000	children	who	can	go	on	to	become	productive	contributors	to	this	society	
in	ways	they	might	never	before	have	even	imagined.	
Mr.	Speaker,	at	the	secondary	level,	access	continues to	be	a	major	problem.	Existing	
secondary	schools	have	a	capacity	to	absorb	only	60%	of	the	students	who	qualify	from	
Junior	High	School.		Because	of	the	high	demand	for	secondary	education,	existing	schools	
have	been	compelled	to	admit	much	higher	than	they	were	designed	to	accommodate.		
This	has	led	to	circumstances	in	which	there	are	some	schools	with	as	many	as	3000	
students.		This	is	significantly	higher	than	the	prescribed	average	of	1500.	
11
Government’s	programme	to	construct	200	new	community	day	secondary	schools	is	on	
track.	Architectural	drawings,	designs	and	quantities	have	been	completed,	sites	for	the	
schools	have	been	selected,	and	the	procurement	process	for	the	first	batch	of	schools	is	
currently	ongoing.	
The	start	of	construction	works	for	these	schools	was	held	back	in	2013	because	of	the	
detailed	activities	that	went	into	the	preparatory	process.		We	have	made	good	progress	
on	this	project	and	I	invite	all	of	you	honourable	members	of	this	august	house	to	join	me	
to	break	ground	for	the commencement	of	construction	of	the	first	50	schools	next	
month,	precisely	on	the	3rd of	March.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	most	expensive	segment	of	our	education	system	is	the	second	cycle.	We	
promised	to	rationalize	fees	in	the	secondary	schools	in	order	to	reduce	the	burden	on	
parents.	The	Ministry	of	Education,	after	extensive	stakeholder	consultations,	advertised	a	
uniform	list	of	approved	fees	for	second	cycle	schools.	Parents	are	being	advised	to	report	
any	head	of	school	that	charges	fees	outside	of	those	on	the	schedule	published	by	the	
Ministry.
Further	to	this,	the	Ministry,	following	consultations	with	stakeholders,	has	prepared	a	
report	on	the	road	map	for	a	progressive	introduction	of	free	secondary	education	in	
Ghana	as	required	under	the	1992	Constitution.	This	road	map	would	be	presented	to	
Cabinet	for	approval	and	subsequent	implementation.	Under	the	guidance	of	this	
proposed	road	map,	we	can	anticipate	that	fees	for	day	students	will	be	abolished	at	an	
estimated	cost	of	GHC71	million	in	the	2015/2016	academic	year.	Other	reliefs	in	respect	of	
boarding	student	would	be	announced	when	the	road	map	is	published.	
Mr.	Speaker,	access	to	tertiary	education	continues	to	expand	with	the	increase	in	
admission	into	public	universities	and	the	participation of	accredited	private	institutions	in	
providing.	While	this	has	provided	opportunity	for	many	to	gain	a	university	education,	we	
must	be	mindful	both	of	the	quality	of	education	provided	and	also	the	disciplines	offered	
in	our	institutions	of	higher	learning.	Some	universities	may	appear	interested	in	only	
expanding	enrolment	to	attract	greater	revenue	and	therefore	waive	the	strict	entry	
qualifications	required	for	study	in	university.	
Additionally	many	universities	and	tertiary	institutions	go	for	the	softer	course	options	and	
churn	out	graduates	in	business	and	the	humanities	at	the	expense	of	science,	technology	
12
and	allied	courses	which	are	increasingly	in	demand	in	an	economy	in	transition	from	lower	
middle	income	to	middle	income	status.	
This	is	partly	responsible	for	the	increasing	graduate	unemployment	level	with	which	we	
are	currently	plagued.	I	have	asked	the	Ministers	of	Education	and	Employment	and	
Labour	Relations	to	sponsor	a	joint	survey	of	the	professional	and	skills	sets	in	demand	in	
the Ghanaian	labour	market.	Such	a	survey	will	provide	students	guidance	in	selecting	
courses	in	areas	where	their	opportunities	for	employment	are	brighter	and	also	provide	
our	universities	with	information	to	adjust	curricula	and	admissions	to	align	with	the	
demands	of	the	job	market.
Mr.	Speaker,	I	am	happy	to	report	to	this	august	house	today	that,	as	stated	in	our	2012	
NDC	manifesto	and	indicated	in	my	2013	State	of	the	Nation	Address,	the	establishment	of	
the	first	public	university	in	the	Eastern	Region	is	becoming	a	reality.
The	Professor	Benning-Amoako-Nuamah	Committee	has	completed	work	on	the	nature,	
specialization,	proposed	academic	mandate	and	specific	location	for	this	university.		A	
draft	bill	for	the	establishment	of	this	new	university	in	the Eastern	Region	is	also	ready	
and	will	soon	be	presented	to	the	House	for	consideration.
Mr.	Speaker,	it	also	pleases	me	to	report	that	progress	is	being	made	with	the	two	latest	
public	universities	that	were	set	up	in	the	last	term	of	the	NDC	Government.		The	
University	of	Health	and	Allied	Sciences	in	the	Volta	Region	has	increased	its	intake	from	
155	students	at	its	inception	three	years	ago	to	535.		
Additionally,	the	University	of	Energy	and	Natural	Resources	in	the	Brong	Ahafo	Region	
has	also	grown	from	150	founding	students	to	716	current	students.
Plans	are	also	afoot	for	the	establishment	of	their	satellite	campuses	in	Hohoe	Dorma	
Ahenkro,	and	Nsoatre.	Honourable	members	will	also	observe	in	the	Ghana	Education	
Trust	Fund	(GETFund)	Formula,	to	be presented	to	the	house	soon,	that	we	have	proposed	
to	scale-up	financial	support	to	these	new	universities.
Mr.	Speaker,	before	the	end	of	this	year,	I	will	announce	the	formal	process	to	convert	ten	
of	our	polytechnics	into	Technical	Universities.	The	Technical	Committee	set	up	by	the	
Ministry	of	Education	has	completed	its	work	and	various	stakeholder	consultations	are	
currently	taking	place,	leading	to	the	final	conversion.	
13
I	must	commend	the	technical	committee	for	their	impressive	output	and,	Mr.	Speaker,	I	
welcome	the	excitement	this	policy	intervention	has	generated	in	the	technical	and	
vocational	education	fraternity.	
Ghanaians	can	remain	assured	that	government	will	continue	in	our	efforts	to	rebrand	
technical	and	vocational	education	and	give it	the	important	attention	and	support	it	
deserves	in	the	development	of	our	nation.		This	move	is	particularly	important	at	this	
critical	moment	of	our	development	when	we	are	embarking	on	the	transformation	of	the	
structure	of	our	economic	fundamentals.
Mr.	Speaker,	despite	resistance	by	some	persons	who	are	even	guaranteed	to	benefit,	just	
like	all	Ghanaians,	we	have	taken	a	major	and	innovative	decision	to	operationalize	a	
National	Research	Fund.	
The	importance	of	a	research	fund	cannot	be	lost	on	any	one	of	us.	Nations	and	companies	
have	become	great	through	research	and	innovation.	How	can	we	adapt	and	develop	
effective	local	solutions	without	investment	in	research	and	innovation?
Mr.	Speaker,	our	lecturers,	researchers	and	students	deserve	this special	support,	so	that	
they	can	increase	their	capacity	to	carry	out	important	scientific	inquiries.	It	is	fitting	that	
this	objective	is	being	led	by	one	of	our	esteemed	academics,	Professor	Daniel	MirekuGyimah,
former	Vice	Chancellor	of	the	University	of	Mines	and	Technology	in	Tarkwa.	
Government	expects	the	Committee	to	make	recommendations	on	the	modalities	for	
accessing	the	Fund,	its	independence	and	its	sustainability.	Higher	institutions	of	learning	
and	all	Ghanaians	especially	the	private	sector	must	support	the	establishment	of	this	
Fund,	which	has	enormous	potential	to	transform	the	fortunes	of	our	nation.
I	wish	to	call	for	the	support	of	the	legislature	in	the	implementation	of	these	decisions	
and	policies,	because,	Mr.	Speaker,	our	nation will	have	greater	prosperity,	with	benefits	
for	all,	as	a	result.
As	a	country,	Mr.	Speaker,	we	can	only	be	happy	with	the	many	academic	opportunities	
being	created	for	the	youth	of	our	country.
d.		Youth	and	Sports	
14
Mr.	Speaker,	as	government	responds to	the	issues	that	confront	the	youth	in	our	
population,	we	are	also	mindful	of	the	need	to	ensure	that	our	young	people	are	part	of	
the	process	of	finding	the	needed	solutions.	
Following	on	the	national	policy	document	launched	in	2010,	we	have	finalized	work	on	an	
Action	and	Implementation	Plan	for	the	National	Youth	Policy.	The	Implementation	Plan	
represents	what	is	a	major	paradigm	shift	in	our	approach	to	youth	development	in	this	
country.		While	the	plan	represents	our	commitment	to	addressing	the	challenges	facing	
our	young	people,	it	is	first	and	foremost	the	work	of	the	youth	themselves.	
Mr.	Speaker,	after	several	rounds	of	discussions	with	our	young	people	and	the	
entrepreneurs	among	them,	we	have	also	finalized	work	on	what	was	proposed	as	a	Youth	
Jobs	and	Enterprise	Development	Fund,	now	to	be	known	as	the	Youth	Enterprise	Support	
(YES).			
The	ten	million	Ghana	cedi	(GH¢10million)	Youth	Enterprise	Support	(YES)	initiative	to	
provide	opportunities	for	innovation	and	the	creation	of	decent	jobs	by	the	youth	of	
Ghana	through	mentorship	and	support.	
While	YES	is	not	a	full	answer	to	our	job	creation	issues,	it	does	reflect	my	commitment	to	
the	future	of	the	Ghanaian	youth.	I	encourage	our	young	people	to	begin	the	process	of	
organizing	and	formalizing	their	business	ideas	to	access	the	facilities	available	under	the	
YES.	
Mr.	Speaker,	construction	of	the	superstructure	of	the	Cape	Coast	Sports	stadium	
commenced	in	June	2013.	The	preparatory	work,	which	involves	ground-levelling,	
extension	of	utilities	to	the	site,	construction	of	drainage	facilities	and	the	layout	of	the	
road,	has	been	completed.	It	is	expected	that	work	will	progress	steadily	and	be	
completed	on	schedule.
Mr.	Speaker,	for	the	third	consecutive	time,	our	Senior	National	Football Team,	the	Ghana	
Black	Stars,	has	qualified	for	the	prestigious	2014	FIFA	World	Cup	Tournament,	to	be	held	
in	Brazil	this	June.	Our	national	Under-17	female	soccer	team	has	also	qualified	to	
participate	in	the	next	FIFA	Under-17	Women’s	World	Cup	Tournament	scheduled	to	take	
place	in	Costa	Rica	next	month.
15
Still	on	Sports,	our	local	Black	Stars	won	last	year’s	WAFU Zone	B	Tournament,	which	was	
hosted	here	in	Ghana.	This	tournament	prepared	our	players	for	the	2014	CHAN	
Tournament,	which	was	recently	concluded	in	South	Africa.	We	won	the	silver	in	that	
tournament.
Mr.	Speaker,	our	sports	teams	consistently	make	Ghana	stand	out	as	being	and	giving	the	
very	best	that	Africa	has	to	offer.		As	part	of	our	commitment	to	ensure	the	further	
development	of	Sports,	the	National	Sports	College	in	Winneba	has	been	pursuing	
successful	private	collaborations	for	infrastructural	development	through	the	PublicPrivate
Partnership	arrangement.	
Government	last	year	reviewed	drawings	of	the	Sports	Arenas	and	Sports	Senior	High	
School	to	be	established	in	the	District	and	Regional	capitals,	and	actual	construction	work	
on	a	selected	few	is	expected	to	begin	as	soon	as	all	the	procurement	formalities	are	
completed.	
PILLAR	II:		BUILDING	A	STRONG	AND	RESILIENT	ECONOMY
a.		Economic	Performance
Mr.	Speaker,	despite	the	short-term	challenges	we	face,	our	economic	fundamentals	
remain	sound	and	our	mid-term	prospects	are	good.	Growth	continues	to	be	robust	at	an	
estimated	7.4%	last	year	and	we	still	retain	our	vision	to	accelerate	and	maintain	GDP	
growth	at	above	8%	going	forward.	
The	non-oil	sector	of	our	economy	grew	by	5.81	percent	over	the	same	period.	The	
agriculture	sector	in	particular,	which	faced	a	few	challenges	the	previous	year,	due	
principally	to	some	difficulties	in	the	cocoa	sector,	still	posted	a	significant	growth	of	3.41	
percent.
That	we	are	transiting	into	a	services	economy	is	apparent	from	the	strong	growth	that	
continues	to	be	posted	by	the	services	sector.	The	sector	in	2010	overtook	agriculture	as	
the	largest	contributor	to	GDP	and	last	year	it	posted	an	impressive	growth	of	9.1%.	The	
Industry	sector,	which	has	witnessed	sluggish	growth	over	the	last	couple	of	years,	last	
year	posted	a	remarkable	increase	of	9.2%.
16
Mr.	Speaker	,	since	2007	the	world	has	been	faced	with	a	financial	crisis	and	Ghana	has	not	
remained	immune	to	the	pressures	created	by	this	crisis.	Recent	tapering	policy	
announced	by	the	US	Federal	Reserve	greatly	impacted	numerous	emerging	markets.		
Ghana	is	one	of	those	affected.		Compounding	this	is	the	fact	that	several	domestic	factors	
have	further	aggravated	the	challenges	with	our	macro	economy:		
A	larger-than-expected	expansion	in	the	wages	and	compensation	bill	during	the	
implementation	of	the	singe	spine	created	a	wage	spiral	that	we	are	working	with	
organized	labour	to	contain.	Huge	and	unsustainable	subsidies	on	petroleum	products	and	
utilities	also	threw	the	budget	out	of	sync.		
The	net	effect	was	an	increase	in	our	budget	deficit	to	nearly	12%,	an	increase	in	inflation	
above	13%,	an	increase	in	interest	rates,	and	also	an	increase	in	our	domestic	debt.
Ghana	is	in	the	capital	markets	to	stay.		And	we	take	note	of	the	concerns	that	analysts	
have	expressed	about	these	developments,	notably	the	compensation	bill	— including	
acknowledgement	of	the	painful	measures	that	our	people	are	having	to	endure	towards	
our	consolidation	effort.	The	visiting	IMF	Article	IV	mission	(who	I	believe	are	here	in	
Chamber	with	us) has	also	expressed	similar	concerns	in	the	course	of	our	interactions	with	
them.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	it	is	for	these	reasons	that	we	have	had	to	take	difficult	measures	to	arrest	
this	trend	and	restore	the	macro	economy	to	good	health.	While	these	measures	have	
been	unpleasant	and	difficult	to	take,	ultimately	they	are	necessary	to	create	a	good	
economic	environment	in	which	businesses	can	continue	to,	not	merely	survive	but	also	
grow.
Mr.	Speaker	,	we	have	had	to	take	difficult	measures	to	arrest	this	trend	and	restore	the	
macro	economy	to	good	health.	While	these	measures	have	been	unpleasant	and	difficult	
to	take,	ultimately	they	are	necessary	to	create	a	good	economic	environment	in	which	
businesses	can	continue	to	not	merely	survive	but	also	grow.	
It	is	an	experience	with	which,	I	am	sure,	we	can	empathise	in	our	daily	lives.	We	have	all,	
at	some	point,	had	to	bear	the	taste	of	a	bitter	medicine	in	order	to	restore	our	bodies	to	
good	health.	
17
Mr.	Speaker	,	I	wish	to	assure	this	august	house,	and	the	good	citizens	of	Ghana	that	as	
with	the	taste	of	any	bitter	medicine,	this	turbulence	we	are	all	being	made	to	bear	is	
temporary.		We	shall	begin	to	see	the	benefits	of	the	sacrifices	we	are	making	very	soon.
Mr.	Speaker	,	as	a	lower	middle-income	country	in	transition	to	middle	income	status,	we	
have	an	enormous	need	for	credit to	develop	our	social	and	economic	infrastructure.	Our	
debt	to	GDP	ratio	is	currently	estimated	at	52%.	While	this	is	not	abnormally	high,	our	
domestic	debt	and	the	current	high	interest	rates	are	a	major	challenge	to	the	economy.		
The	Hon	Minister	for	Finance	is	currently	implementing	measures	to	refinance	a	portion	of	
the	domestic	debt,	thereby	reducing	the	pressures	these	obligations	are	placing	on	the	
budget.	
We	have	also	commenced	work	on	the	Ghana	Infrastructure	Investment	Fund.	This	fund	
will	enable	us	to	disaggregate	our	debt	profile	and	transfer	infrastructure	investments	
with	a	revenue	generating	capacity	from	the	public	debt.	Institutions	such	as	Ghana	Gas,	
VRA,	GPHA,	GACL,	GNPC	and	other	public	and	private	institutions	would	be	able	to	finance
their	investments	through	this	window	without	burdening	the	public	debt	stock.	This	
should	significantly	improve	our	debt	sustainability	profile.
We	will	work	with	our	development	partners	and	other	multi-lateral	associates	to	ensure	
that	Ghana	continues on	the	path	of	accelerated	growth	and	equitable	development	into	
the	future.
b.		Foreign	Exchange	
Mr.	Speaker	,	recent	measures	announced	by	the	Bank	of	Ghana	in	response	to	the	
depreciation	of	the	cedi	created	some	concern	among	the	business	and	investment	
community.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	Ghana	still	remains	the	most	attractive	investment	destination	in	West	Africa	
and	guarantees	peace,	safety,	stability	and	security.	I	wish	to	assure	investors	that	all	
agreements	governing	their	investments	remain	in	force	and	repatriation	of	profits	and	
dividends	are	guaranteed.	The	BOG	has	clarified	its	regulations	in	respect	of	foreign	
currency	accounts	and	it	is	my	hope	that	this	has	allayed	the	concerns	of	both	the	
domestic	and	foreign	investor	communities.	
18
Mr.	Speaker,	Ghana	has	come	from	the	environment	in	the	70’s	and	early	80’s	when	a	
command	and	control	economy	led	to	a	strict	regulation	of	foreign	exchange.		Reforms	in	
the	mid	80’s	saw	the	introduction	of	forex	bureaus	and	the	liberalization	of	the	foreign	
exchange	regime.	In	this	transition	we	moved	from	one	extreme	to	another,	a	situation	in	
which	control	of	forex	was	so	lax,	that	Ghana	was	fast	becoming	a	source	of	foreign	
exchange	for	our	neighbours.	Huge	transactions	in	millions	of	dollars	were	being	
conducted	in	forex	bureaus.		This	had	not	been	the	original	intention.	
Dwindling	confidence	in	our	currency	led	to	a	situation	where	people	hedged	on	the	dollar.	
Persons	with	excess	cedis	converted	them	into	dollars	and	deposited	them	in	their	foreign	
exchange	accounts.	We	had	a	situation	where	forex	holdings	on	behalf	of	businesses	and	
individuals	in	our	commercial	banks	amounted	to	over	$3	billion.
In	addition,	our	economy	had	become	increasingly	dollarized.	Hotel	room	rates,	vehicles,	
rents,	school	fees,	household	appliances,	consumer	items,	cosmetics,	clothes	and	other	
items	were	all	quoted	in	dollars.	The	obvious	problem	with	this	is	that	the	dollar	is	not	our	
national	currency.		The	currency	of	Ghana	is	the	cedi,	and	the	cedi	will	only	gain	strength	if	
we	begin	to	view	and	use	it	as	that,	our	nation’s	only	currency.		The	Attorney	General	and	
the	EOCO	have	been	charged	to	monitor	the	situation	and	severely	sanction	any	institution	
advertising	rates	or	prices	and	charging	in	foreign	currency.	A	directive	to	the	same	effect	
has	also	been	issued	to	government	agencies.	
c.		Transforming	our	economy
Mr.	Speaker,	the	basic	structure	of	our	economy	has	not	changed	from	colonial	times.	The	
Gold	Coast	was	designed	by	the	colonial	masters	to	be	exporters	of	raw	material	and	
importers	of	finished	goods.	This	is	what	best	served	their	needs	and	purposes.		
After	independence	our	first	President	Osagyefo	Dr.	Kwame	Nkrumah	of	blessed	memory,	
sought	to	break	this	vicious	cycle	by	establishing	numerous	state	owned	industries	to	
produce	consumer	products	for	the	domestic	market	as	an	import	substitution	measure.	
Unfortunately,	the	management	of	these	enterprises	became	a	challenge	and	soon	they	
turned	into	a	very	huge	expense	on	the	budget.	A	decision	was	made	to	divest	these	
enterprises	to	the	private	sector.	Unfortunately,	in	many	cases,	the	domestic	private	
sector	was	unable	to	leverage	the	financing	needed	to	revamp	these	industries	and	bring	
them	back	into	production.
19
Mr.	Speaker	the result	is	that	we	are	still	largely dependent	on	the	export	of	raw	material,	
gold,	cocoa,	timber,	oil	and	mineral	exports	and	on	the	import	of	finished	goods.		That	is	
still	the	basic	structure	of	our	economy.	
Mr.	Speaker, a	fundamental	problem	of	our	economy	is	that	we	do	not	make	what	we	
consume.		This	is	the	situation	the	late	General	Acheampong	sought	to	address	with	the	
“Operation	Feed	Yourself”	and	“Operation	Feed	Your	Industries”	programmes,	which	
were	aimed	at	strengthening	Ghana’s	ability	to	be	self-reliant.			
Mr.	Speaker, in	2013	alone	we	spent	a	whopping	amount	of	almost	$1.5	billion	in	foreign	
currency	on	the	import	of	rice,	sugar,	wheat,	tomato	products,	frozen	fish,	poultry	and	
vegetable	cooking	oils.		Rice	accounted	for	$374	million,	fish	$283.3	million,	wheat	$226.7	
million,	poultry	$169.2	million,	cooking	oils	$127	million,	tomato	products	$112.1	million.
Mr.	Speaker,	imagine	if	this	money	had	been	retained	in	Ghana.		Imagine	if	it	had	gone	into	
the	pockets	of	Ghanaian	entrepreneurs	who	would,	in	turn,	spend	those	cedis at	markets,	
restaurants,	beauty	shops,	pharmacies,	shopping	centres	and	other	Ghanaian	enterprises.		
When	Ghanaians	produce	goods	that	other	Ghanaians	use,	they	are	then	able	to	re-invest	
that	revenue	back	into	the	very	communities	that	patronized	them.		The	money	flows	in	a	
current,	and	it	fortifies	the	nation’s	economy.		That,	Mr.	Speaker,	is	the	best	use	of	a	
nation’s	currency.		Imagine	all	that	we	could	achieve	if	in	one	year,	we	could	spend	as	
much	in	cedis	on	locally	produced	rice,	sugar,	wheat,	tomato	products,	frozen	fish,	poultry,	
vegetable	and	cooking	oils,	as	we	spent	in	dollars	on	those	very	same	imported	items	last	
year.		Just	imagine!
Mr.	Speaker, as	we	all	know,	raw	material	exports	are	subject	to	price	fluctuations	on	the	
international	market.	Countries	that	are	dependent	on	raw	material	exports	are	therefore	
subject	to	wild	cycles	of	booms	and	busts.	
Mr.	Speaker, 57	years	after	independence,	we	need	to	take	pause	and	ask	ourselves	some	
critical	questions.	Can	the	current	structure	of	our	economy	carry	us	to	the	next	level?	
What	changes	must	we	make	to	create	an	economic	structure	that	will	serve	our	needs	
and	purposes?	
20
Mr.	Speaker, between	2012	and	2013	Ghana	lost	$1.3	billion	in	export	revenues	on	account	
of	the	decline	in	cocoa	and	gold	prices.	At	the	same	time	our	import	bill	rose	dramatically	
to	$17	billion.
Can	we,	as	a	nation,	continue	this	unbridled	importation	of	everything	from	plastic	dolls	to	
toothpicks?	Must	we	continue	to	rely	on	a	narrow	band	of	raw	material	exports?	Were	we	
born	to	be	a	nation	of	only	shopkeepers	and	traders?	My	definite	response	to	these	
questions	is	NO!
Once	more,	Mr.	Speaker, we	return	to	the	need	for	change	in	order	to	facilitate	growth.		
We	must	change	the	structure	of	our	economy.	We	must	reduce	the	importation	of	items	
that	we	have	a	comparative	advantage	to	produce.	We	must	add	value	to	our	exports	
through	primary,	secondary	and	tertiary	processing:		add	value	to	our	cocoa	by	increased	
domestic	processing;	refine	our	gold	before	export;	pursue Nkrumah’s	dream	of	an	
integrated	bauxite	and	alumina	industry.	We	must	revamp	Tema	Oil	Refinery,	revive	BOST,	
VALCO,	Tema	Shipyard	and	Drydock	and	the	many	other	strategic	industries	that	serve	as	
extra	pillars	for	our	economy.	
Mr.	Speaker, in	compliance	with	the	Constitution	I	am	required	to	present	this	house	with	
a	medium	term	development	framework	before	the	close	of	this	year.	I	have	dialogued	
with	the	NDPC	that	is	working	on	this	plan	and	urged	them	to	come	out	with	a	plan	that	
fundamentally	addresses	this	weakness	in	the	structure	of	our	economy.	I	have	specifically	
tasked	them	to	handle	the	process	in	a	way	as	to	create	a	buy-in	from	all	Ghanaians	
irrespective	of	political	affiliation	or	societal	status.		This	is	not	a	time	to	stand	divided	
along any	lines;	this	is	not	the	time	to	stand	on	the	sidelines;	this	is	the	time	for	us	to	stand	
together,	as	Ghanaians,	on	the	side	of	Ghana.
In	the	interim,	to	kick	start	this	process	of	transformation,	I	have	tasked	the	Minister	of	
Trade	and	Industry	to	request	that	the	Export	Development	and	Agriculture	Investment	
Fund	extend	assistance	to	local	investors	for	increased	production	of	poultry,	rice,	
tomatoes,	cooking	oil,	and	fish.
Mr.	Speaker, financing	has	been	finalized	for	the	construction	of	a	new	sugar	processing	
plant	in	Komenda	in	the	Central	Region.		
21
We	are	also	in	discussion	with	another	private	sector	investor	about	the	establishment	of	
another	sugar	processing	plant	in	the	north	near	Savelugu.	I	have	requested	that	the	Hon.	
Minister	of	Trade	and Industry	give	these	two	projects	his	personal	attention.
Mr.	Speaker, I	have	also	tasked	the	Minister	to	speak	with	the	operators	of	flour	mills	and	
introduce	incentives	for	production	of	composite	flours	that	incorporate	more	local	flour	
from	products	like	cassava,	maize	and	sorghum.
It	is	my	intention	to	commence	work	this	year	on	the	realization	of	the	integrated	bauxite	
and	aluminium	industry,	including	the	revamping	of	VALCO.
A	joint	venture	agreement	between	TOR	and	Petro	Saudi	is	being	finalized	to	revamp	the	
operations	of	our	oil	refinery.	This	will	reduce	the	huge	amount	of	forex	we	expend	on	the	
importation	of	finished	petroleum	products.	
A	Transactions	Advisor	is	being	selected	to	guide	the	process	of	choosing	a	strategic	
partner	to	invest in	the	Tema	Shipyard	and	Dry	dock	Industry.
I	have	asked	the	Ghana	Cocoa	Board	to	enter	into	a	strategic	partnership	to	produce	jute	
sacks	in	Ghana.	This	will	start	by	the	importation	of	the	jute	fibres	and	the	sewing	of	the	
sacks	locally.	It	will	eventually	backward	integrate	into	the	production	of	kenaf	and	the	
weaving	of	the	jute	fibres	locally.	Cocobod	will,	at	that	time,	be	required	to	halt	the	
importation	of	jute	sacks	and	buy	all	its	sacks	from	this	factory.
I	have	asked	the	Board	and	Management	of	the	Electricity	Company	of	Ghana	to	
encourage	the	local	manufacture	of	electrical	products	like	cables,	transformers,	meters	
etc	by	purchasing	from	local	producers	who	meet	their	quality	standard.	
Mr.	Speaker,	we	will	this	year	launch	a	broad	campaign	to	encourage	Ghanaians	to	buy	
made-in-Ghana	goods.	Any	import	item	we	buy	as	Ghanaians	constitutes	an	export	of	jobs	
out	of	our	country,	especially	in	respect	of	items	for	which	we	have	a	comparative	
advantage	to	produce.
Mr.	Speaker	,	last	week	I	held	several	meetings	with	a	host	of	leaders	in	the	business	
community,	from	large	corporations	to	medium	and	small-scale	enterprises,	companies	as	
22
wide-ranging	as	CalBank,	FinaTrade,	and	Scancom	to	Sethi	Industries,	Beige	Capital,	Reroy	
Cables	and	Agbeve	Herbal.		
The	purpose	of	these	meetings	was	to	open	an	honest	and	easy	exchange	of	ideas	and	
information	between	Government	and	the	private	sector.		The	better	we	are	able	to	assist	
one	another,	the	faster	we	can	all	help	to	strengthen	the	economy	by	building	a	Ghana	
that	is	self-sufficient	and	successful.
Mr.	Speaker	,	I	was	encouraged	and	inspired	by	these	meetings.		The	determined,	
hardworking,	visionary	men	and	women	I	met	reaffirmed	my	belief	that	Ghanaians	are	
more	than	capable	of	creating	industries	to	sustain	this	country.		I	met	Mr.	Magnus	Nunoo,	
President	of	the	National	Association	of	Sachet	and	Packaged	Water	Producers.		Mr.	
Nunoo	spoke	to	me	with	the	eloquence	and	knowledge	of	an	economist;	and	why	not?		
Mr.	Nunoo	attended	schools	in	Cape	Coast,	Ningo	and	Labone;	he	read	Economics	at	
Legon.		Mr.	Nunoo	introduced	the	packaging	of	water	in	sachets	and	he	now	employs	over	
100,000	people.		Mr.	Nunoo	even	found	value	in	his	industry’s	waste,	and	became	a	
proponent	of	commercial-scale	plastic	waste	management.
Mr.	Speaker	,	at	this	same	meeting,	I	also	made	an	acquaintance	of	Mr.	Tony	Senayah,	of	
Horseman	Shoes,	a	company	he	started	in	2009	by	buying	and	selling	locally	made	shoes	
from	a	manufacturer	in	LaPaz.	It	had	always	been	Mr.	Senayah’s	dream	to	build a	
vocational	training	institute.		One	day	he	saw	a	business	opportunity.		He	realized	that	a	lot	
of	the	young	people	he	knew	were	skilled	at	making	shoes,	but	beyond	that	they	didn’t	
know	how	to	make	their	work	economically	viable.		Suddenly	he	saw	a	way	to	create	
employment	for	young	people.		He	recruited	them	to	make	the	shoes	that	he	designed.		
And,	Mr.	Speaker,	I	tell	you:	they	are	very	nice,	very	comfortable	shoes.		In	fact,	I	am	
wearing	a	pair	right	now.
c.		Education
When	it	comes	to	education,	Mr. Speaker	,	government’s	top	areas	of	focus	are	quality,	
access,	and	affordability.	There	was	a	time	when	our	public	school	system	was	on	track	
and	on	par	with	the	private	schools	here	in	Ghana,	and	anywhere	else	in	the	world.		Where	
education	is	concerned, we	have	a	history	of	being	quite	visionary.		
23
When	the	Prince	of	Wales	College,	which	later	became	Achimota,	was	established	in	1924	
as	a	co-educational	facility,	gender	equality	in	education	was	far	from	the	norm.		In	fact,	
most	women	the	world	over	did not	even	have	the	right	to	vote	or	own	property.		But	in	
Ghana,	girls	and	young	women	were	being	educated	alongside	their	male	counterparts.		
And,	rightfully,	with	that	education	came	the	expectation	of	comparable	careers.		
When	the	commission	on	higher education	in	the	British	colonies	recommended	that	a	
single	university	be	established	in	British	West	Africa	and	chose	Ibadan,	Nigeria	as	the	
location	of	that	university,	we	Ghanaians	challenged	their	decision.		We	understood	the	
value	of	education.		We	knew	what	the	presence	of	an	institution	of	higher	learning	would	
mean	to	our	people,	especially	to	the	future	generations.		In	the	end	our	protest	was	
successful	and	that	university	which	was	established	in	1948	as	an	affiliate	of	the	University	
of	London	is	now	none	other	than	our	esteemed	University	of	Ghana.						
Mr.	Speaker	,	we	must	make	education	a	priority	again.	The	students	of	this	nation	deserve	
to	have	the	confidence	that	comes	from	knowing	that	the	education	they	are	receiving	will	
adequately	prepare	them	to	navigate	this	competitive	global	workplace.	If	our	students	
are	left	behind,	then	we	as	a	nation	will	also	be	left	behind.
To	this	end,	Government	has	been	working	to	improve	the	quality	of	education,	especially	
at	the	basic	level.	The	main	problems	affecting	this	level	are	a	lack	of	teachers,	a	lack	of	
teaching	and	learning	materials,	and	poor	school	infrastructure	especially,	in	the	rural	
areas;	and,	also,	community	apathy	in	the	management	of	schools.
We	are	actively	engaged	in	the	process	of	building	new	school	blocks	to	replace	schools	in	
sub-standard	structures.	In	1,900	communities,	mostly	rural,	this	has	improved	the	
environment	in	which	children	learn	and	enabled	classes	to	be	held	all	year	round.	
In	urban	schools,	these	additional	facilities	have	enabled	Government	to	progressively	
eliminate	the	shift	system	that	had	children	attending	school	in	turns.	Science	resource	
24
centres	have	also	been	rehabilitated	across	the	country	to	facilitate	the	learning	of	science	
and	mathematics.
Mr.	Speaker	,	the	availability	of	teachers	has	been	a	major	challenge.	Because	of	
constraints	of	paying	teacher	trainee	allowances,	Government	previously	imposed	quotas	
on	admissions	into	colleges	of	education.	Annual	admission	to	these	colleges	was	
therefore	restricted.	
With	the	recent	decision	to	transfer	teacher	trainees	onto	the	Students	Loan	Trust,	it	has	
made	it	possible	to	increase	the	number	of	trainees	in	the	colleges	of	education	from	the	
previous	9000	to	15000.	This	would	improve	the	supply	of	teachers	and	open	up	the	
opportunity	to	many	young	people	who	want	to	take	up	teaching	as	a	profession.
Unfortunately,	it	has	become	apparent	that	the	training	of	these	professionals	does	not	
always	translate	into	an	availability	of	teachers	in	certain	areas.		Mr.	Speaker	,	I	am	
concerned,	and	we	all	must	be	concerned,	about	the	findings	from	a	national	staff	
rationalization	exercise	just	completed	by	the	Ministry	of	Education.		It	is	clear	that	we	
need	to	do	better	with	the	deployment	of	our	teachers.
The	current	situation	is	that	in	many	regions	there	is	an	excess	of	teachers	in	urban	and	
peri-urban	areas,	but	in	the	rural	and	other	deprived	communities,	teachers	are	often	in	
short	supply.		We	cannot	accept	this	educational	divide	between	our	urban	and	rural	
communities.
So,	Mr.	Speaker	,	I	am	calling	for	nationwide	support	for	the	Education	Ministry	and	the	
Ghana	Education	Service	as	they	take	the	necessary	actions	to	implement	a	programme	
aimed	at	an	immediate	and	comprehensive	redeployment	and	redistribution	of	teachers.
25
It	is	very	important	that	all	Metropolitan,	Municipal	and	District	Chief	Executives,	as	well	as	
MPs	and	community	leaders	take	an	active	part	in	these	efforts	to	address	issues	of	
education	at	the	district	and	community	levels.		Together,	we	can	and	we	must	improve	
school	management,	performance	and	accountability	across	our	nation.
Mr.	Speaker	,	the	lack	of	instructional	and	learning	materials	is	also	being	addressed	
through	the	supply	of	textbooks	and	exercise	books	to	children	in	public	schools	across	
the	country.	Through	this	programme,	more	than	12	million	books	have	been	distributed	to	
basic	schoolchildren	in	the	country,	thus	equipping	them	with	the	core	tools	they	require	
for	their	education.
While	Ghana	has	been	successful	in achieving	the	Millennium	Development	Goals	(MDGs)	
on	universal	primary	education,	there	still	remain	pockets	where	school	enrolment	is	low.	
To	address	this,	Government	introduced	the	Complementary	Basic	Education	programme.	
This	programme	has	facilitated	teaching	and	learning	for	25,000	out-of-school	children.	
Classes	under	this	programme	are	ongoing	in	the	Upper	East,	Upper	West.	Northern	and	
Brong	Ahafo	Regions.		Now,	there	are	25,000	children	whose	choices	will	not	be	limited	by	
illiteracy;	25,000	children	who	can	go	on	to	become	productive	contributors	to	this	society	
in	ways	they	might	never	before	have	even	imagined.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	at	the	secondary	level,	access	continues	to	be	a	major	problem.	Existing	
secondary	schools	have	a	capacity	to	absorb	only	60%	of	the	students	who	qualify	from	
Junior	High	School.		Because	of	the	high	demand	for	secondary	education,	existing	schools	
have	been	compelled	to	admit	much	higher	than	they	were	designed	to	accommodate.		
This	has	led	to	circumstances	in	which	there	are	some	schools	with	as	many	as	3000	
students.		This	is	significantly	higher	than	the	prescribed	average	of	1500.	
26
Government’s	programme	to	construct	200	new	community	day	secondary	schools	is	on	
track.	Architectural	drawings,	designs	and	quantities	have	been	completed,	sites	for	the	
schools	have	been	selected,	and	the	procurement	process	for	the	first	batch	of	schools	is	
currently	ongoing.	
The	start	of	construction	works	for	these	schools	was	held	back	in	2013	because	of	the	
detailed	activities	that went	into	the	preparatory	process.		We	have	made	good	progress	
on	this	project	and	I	invite	all	of	you	honourable	members	of	this	august	house	to	join	me	
to	break	ground	for	the	commencement	of	construction	of	the	first	50	schools	next	
month,	precisely	on the	3rd of	March.
Mr.	Speaker	,	the	most	expensive	segment	of	our	education	system	is	the	second	cycle.	
We	promised	to	rationalize	fees	in	the	secondary	schools	in	order	to	reduce	the	burden	on	
parents.	The	Ministry	of	Education,	after	extensive	stakeholder	consultations,	advertised	a	
uniform	list	of	approved	fees	for	second	cycle	schools.	Parents	are	being	advised	to	report	
any	head	of	school	that	charges	fees	outside	of	those	on	the	schedule	published	by	the	
Ministry.
Further	to	this,	the	Ministry,	following	consultations	with	stakeholders,	has	prepared	a	
report	on	the	road	map	for	a	progressive	introduction	of	free	secondary	education	in	
Ghana	as	required	under	the	1992	Constitution.	This	road	map	would	be	presented	to	
Cabinet	for	approval	and	subsequent	implementation.	Under	the	guidance	of	this	
proposed	road	map,	we	can	anticipate	that	fees	for	day	students	will	be	abolished	at	an	
estimated	cost	of	GHC71	million	in	the	2015/2016	academic	year.	Other	reliefs	in	respect	of	
boarding	student	would	be	announced	when	the	road	map	is	published.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	access	to	tertiary	education	continues	to	expand	with	the	increase	in	
admission	into	public	universities	and	the	participation	of	accredited	private	institutions	in	
providing.	While	this	has	provided	opportunity	for	many	to	gain	a	university	education,	we	
must	be	mindful	both	of	the	quality	of	education	provided	and	also	the	disciplines	offered	
in	our	institutions	of	higher	learning.	Some	universities	may	appear	interested	in	only	
27
expanding	enrolment	to	attract	greater	revenue	and	therefore	waive	the	strict	entry	
qualifications	required	for	study	in	university.	
Additionally	many	universities	and	tertiary	institutions	go	for	the	softer	course	options	and	
churn	out	graduates	in	business	and	the	humanities at	the	expense	of	science,	technology	
and	allied	courses	which	are	increasingly	in	demand	in	an	economy	in	transition	from	lower	
middle	income	to	middle	income	status.	
This	is	partly	responsible	for	the	increasing	graduate	unemployment	level	with	which	we	
are	currently	plagued.	I	have	asked	the	Ministers	of	Education	and	Employment	and	
Labour	Relations	to	sponsor	a	joint	survey	of	the	professional	and	skills	sets	in	demand	in	
the	Ghanaian	labour	market.	Such	a	survey	will	provide	students	guidance	in	selecting	
courses	in	areas	where	their	opportunities	for	employment	are	brighter	and	also	provide	
our	universities	with	information	to	adjust	curricula	and	admissions	to	align	with	the	
demands	of	the	job	market.
Mr.	Speaker	,	I	am	happy	to	report	to	this	august	house	today	that,	as	stated	in	our	2012	
NDC	manifesto	and	indicated	in	my	2013	State	of	the	Nation	Address,	the	establishment	of	
the	first	public	university	in	the	Eastern	Region	is	becoming	a	reality.
The	Professor	Benning-Amoako-Nuamah	Committee	has completed	work	on	the	nature,	
specialization,	proposed	academic	mandate	and	specific	location	for	this	university.		A	
draft	bill	for	the	establishment	of	this	new	university	in	the	Eastern	Region	is	also	ready	
and	will	soon	be	presented	to	the	House	for	consideration.
Mr.	Speaker	,	it	also	pleases	me	to	report	that	progress	is	being	made	with	the	two	latest	
public	universities	that	were	set	up	in	the	last	term	of	the	NDC	Government.		The	
University	of	Health	and	Allied	Sciences	in	the	Volta	Region	has	increased	its	intake	from	
155	students	at	its	inception	three	years	ago	to	535.		
28
Additionally,	the	University	of	Energy	and	Natural	Resources	in	the	Brong	Ahafo	Region	
has	also	grown	from	150	founding	students	to	716	current	students.
Plans	are	also	afoot	for	the	establishment	of	their	satellite	campuses	in	Hohoe	Dorma	
Ahenkro,	and	Nsoatre.	Honourable	members	will	also	observe	in	the	Ghana	Education	
Trust	Fund	(GETFund)	Formula,	to	be	presented	to	the	house	soon,	that	we	have	proposed	
to	scale-up	financial	support	to	these	new	universities.
Mr.	Speaker,	before	the	end	of	this	year,	I	will	announce	the	formal	process	to	convert	ten	
of	our	polytechnics	into	Technical	Universities.	The	Technical	Committee	set	up	by	the	
Ministry	of	Education	has	completed	its	work	and	various	stakeholder	consultations	are	
currently	taking	place,	leading	to	the	final	conversion.	
I	must	commend	the	technical	committee	for	their	impressive	output	and,	Mr.	Speaker,	I	
welcome	the	excitement	this	policy	intervention	has	generated	in the	technical	and	
vocational	education	fraternity.	
Ghanaians	can	remain	assured	that	government	will	continue	in	our	efforts	to	rebrand	
technical	and	vocational	education	and	give	it	the	important	attention	and	support	it	
deserves	in	the	development	of	our	nation.		This	move	is	particularly	important	at	this	
critical	moment	of	our	development	when	we	are	embarking	on	the	transformation	of	the	
structure	of	our	economic	fundamentals.	
Mr.	Speaker,	despite	resistance	by	some	persons	who	are	even	guaranteed to	benefit,	just	
like	all	Ghanaians,	we	have	taken	a	major	and	innovative	decision	to	operationalize	a	
National	Research	Fund.	
29
The	importance	of	a	research	fund	cannot	be	lost	on	any	one	of	us.	Nations	and	companies	
have	become	great	through	research	and	innovation.	How	can	we	adapt	and	develop	
effective	local	solutions	without	investment	in	research	and	innovation?
Mr.	Speaker,	our	lecturers,	researchers	and	students	deserve	this	special	support,	so	that	
they	can	increase	their	capacity	to	carry	out	important	scientific	inquiries.	It	is	fitting	that	
this	objective	is	being	led	by	one	of	our	esteemed	academics,	Professor	Daniel	MirekuGyimah,
former	Vice	Chancellor	of	the	University	of	Mines	and	Technology	in	Tarkwa.	
Government	expects	the	Committee	to make	recommendations	on	the	modalities	for	
accessing	the	Fund,	its	independence	and	its	sustainability.	Higher	institutions	of	learning	
and	all	Ghanaians	especially	the	private	sector	must	support	the	establishment	of	this	
Fund,	which	has	enormous	potential	to	transform	the	fortunes	of	our	nation.
I	wish	to	call	for	the	support	of	the	legislature	in	the	implementation	of	these	decisions	
and	policies,	because,	Mr.	Speaker,	our	nation	will	have	greater	prosperity,	with	benefits	
for	all,	as	a	result.
As	a	country,	Mr.	Speaker	,	we	can	only	be	happy	with	the	many	academic	opportunities	
being	created	for	the	youth	of	our	country.
d.		Youth	and	Sports	
Mr.	Speaker	,	as	government	responds	to	the	issues	that	confront	the	youth	in	our	
population,	we	are	also	mindful	of	the	need	to	ensure	that	our	young	people	are	part	of	
the	process	of	finding	the	needed	solutions.	
30
Following	on	the	national	policy	document	launched	in	2010,	we	have	finalized	work	on	an	
Action	and	Implementation	Plan	for	the	National	Youth	Policy.	The	Implementation	Plan	
represents	what	is	a	major	paradigm	shift	in	our	approach	to	youth	development	in	this	
country.		While	the	plan	represents	our	commitment	to	addressing	the	challenges	facing	
our	young	people,	it	is	first	and	foremost	the	work	of the	youth	themselves.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	after	several	rounds	of	discussions	with	our	young	people	and	the	
entrepreneurs	among	them,	we	have	also	finalized	work	on	what	was	proposed	as	a	Youth	
Jobs	and	Enterprise	Development	Fund,	now	to	be	known	as	the	Youth	Enterprise	Support	
(YES).			
The	ten	million	Ghana	cedi	(GH¢10million)	Youth	Enterprise	Support	(YES)	initiative	to	
provide	opportunities	for	innovation	and	the	creation	of	decent	jobs	by	the	youth	of	
Ghana	through	mentorship	and	support.	
While	YES	is not	a	full	answer	to	our	job	creation	issues,	it	does	reflect	my	commitment	to	
the	future	of	the	Ghanaian	youth.	I	encourage	our	young	people	to	begin	the	process	of	
organizing	and	formalizing	their	business	ideas	to	access	the	facilities	available	under	the	
YES.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	construction	of	the	superstructure	of	the	Cape	Coast	Sports	stadium	
commenced	in	June	2013.	The	preparatory	work,	which	involves	ground-levelling,	
extension	of	utilities	to	the	site,	construction	of	drainage	facilities	and	the	layout	of	the	
road,	has	been	completed.	It	is	expected	that	work	will	progress	steadily	and	be	
completed	on	schedule.
Mr.	Speaker	,	for	the	third	consecutive	time,	our	Senior	National	Football	Team,	the	Ghana	
Black	Stars,	has	qualified	for	the	prestigious	2014	FIFA	World	Cup	Tournament,	to	be	held	
in	Brazil	this	June.	Our	national	Under-17	female	soccer	team	has	also	qualified	to	
participate	in	the	next	FIFA	Under-17	Women’s	World	Cup	Tournament	scheduled	to	take	
place	in	Costa	Rica	next	month.
31
Still	on	Sports, our	local	Black	Stars	won	last	year’s	WAFU Zone	B	Tournament,	which	was	
hosted	here	in	Ghana.	This	tournament	prepared	our	players	for	the	2014	CHAN	
Tournament,	which	was	recently	concluded	in	South	Africa.	We	won	the	silver	in	that	
tournament.
Mr.	Speaker	,	our	sports	teams	consistently	make	Ghana	stand	out	as	being	and	giving	the	
very	best	that	Africa	has	to	offer.		As	part	of	our	commitment	to	ensure	the	further	
development	of	Sports,	the	National	Sports	College	in	Winneba	has	been	pursuing	
successful	private	collaborations	for	infrastructural	development	through	the	PublicPrivate
Partnership	arrangement.	
Government	last	year	reviewed	drawings	of	the	Sports	Arenas	and	Sports	Senior	High	
School	to	be	established	in	the	District	and	Regional	capitals,	and	actual	construction	work	
on	a	selected	few	is	expected	to	begin	as	soon	as	all	the	procurement	formalities	are	
completed.	
		
PILLAR	II:		BUILDING	A	STRONG	AND	RESILIENT	ECONOMY
a.		Economic	Performance
Mr.	Speaker	,	despite	the	short-term	challenges	we	face,	our	economic	fundamentals	
remain	sound	and	our	mid-term	prospects	are	good.	Growth	continues	to	be	robust	at	an	
estimated	7.4%	last	year	and	we	still	retain	our	vision	to	accelerate	and	maintain	GDP	
growth	at	above	8%	going	forward.	
The	non-oil	sector	of	our	economy	grew	by	5.81	percent	over	the	same	period.	The	
agriculture	sector	in	particular,	which	faced	a	few	challenges	the	previous	year,	due	
principally	to	some	difficulties	in	the	cocoa	sector,	still	posted	a	significant	growth	of	3.41	
percent.
That	we	are	transiting	into	a	services	economy	is	apparent	from	the	strong	growth	that	
continues	to	be	posted	by	the	services	sector.	The	sector	in	2010	overtook	agriculture	as	
32
the	largest	contributor	to	GDP	and	last	year	it	posted	an	impressive	growth	of	9.1%.	The	
Industry	sector,	which	has	witnessed	sluggish	growth	over	the	last	couple	of	years,	last	
year	posted	a	remarkable	increase	of	9.2%.
Mr.	Speaker	,	since	2007	the	world	has	been	faced	with	a	financial	crisis	and	Ghana	has	not	
remained	immune	to	the	pressures	created	by	this	crisis.	Recent	tapering	policy	
announced	by	the	US	Federal	Reserve	greatly	impacted	numerous	emerging	markets.		
Ghana	is	one	of	those	affected.		Compounding	this	is	the	fact	that	several	domestic	factors	
have	further	aggravated	the	challenges	with	our	macro	economy:		
A	larger-than-expected	expansion	in	the	wages	and	compensation	bill	during	the	
implementation	of	the	singe	spine	created	a	wage	spiral	that	we	are	working	with	
organized	labour	to	contain.	Huge	and	unsustainable	subsidies	on	petroleum	products	and	
utilities	also	threw	the	budget	out	of	sync.		
The	net	effect	was	an	increase	in	our	budget	deficit	to	nearly	12%,	an	increase	in	inflation	
above	13%,	an	increase	in	interest	rates,	and	also	an	increase	in	our	domestic	debt.
Ghana	is	in	the	capital	markets	to	stay.		And	we	take	note	of	the	concerns	that	analysts	
have	expressed	about	these	developments,	notably	the	compensation	bill	— including	
acknowledgement	of	the	painful	measures	that	our	people	are	having	to	endure	towards	
our	consolidation	effort.	The	visiting	IMF	Article	IV	mission	(who	I	believe	are	here	in	
Chamber	with	us) has	also	expressed	similar	concerns	in	the	course	of	our	interactions	with	
them.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	it	is	for	these	reasons	that	we	have	had	to	take	difficult	measures	to	arrest	
this	trend	and	restore	the	macro	economy	to	good	health.	While	these	measures	have	
been	unpleasant	and	difficult	to	take,	ultimately	they	are	necessary	to	create	a	good	
economic	environment	in	which	businesses	can	continue	to,	not	merely	survive	but	also	
grow.
Mr.	Speaker	,	we	have	had	to	take	difficult	measures	to	arrest	this	trend	and	restore	the	
macro	economy	to	good	health.	While	these	measures	have	been	unpleasant	and	difficult	
to	take,	ultimately	they	are	necessary to	create	a	good	economic	environment	in	which	
businesses	can	continue	to	not	merely	survive	but	also	grow.	
33
It	is	an	experience	with	which,	I	am	sure,	we	can	empathise	in	our	daily	lives.	We	have	all,	
at	some	point,	had	to	bear	the	taste	of	a	bitter	medicine	in	order	to	restore	our	bodies	to	
good	health.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	I	wish	to	assure	this	august	house,	and	the	good	citizens	of	Ghana	that	as	
with	the	taste	of	any	bitter	medicine,	this	turbulence	we	are	all	being	made	to	bear	is	
temporary.		We	shall	begin	to	see	the	benefits	of	the	sacrifices	we	are	making	very	soon.
Mr.	Speaker	,	as	a	lower	middle-income	country	in	transition	to	middle	income	status,	we	
have	an	enormous	need	for	credit	to	develop	our	social	and	economic	infrastructure.	Our	
debt	to	GDP	ratio	is	currently	estimated	at	52%.	While	this	is	not	abnormally	high,	our	
domestic	debt	and	the	current	high	interest	rates	are	a	major	challenge	to	the	economy.		
The	Hon	Minister	for	Finance	is	currently	implementing	measures	to	refinance	a	portion	of	
the	domestic	debt,	thereby	reducing	the	pressures	these	obligations	are	placing	on	the	
budget.	
We	have	also	commenced	work	on	the	Ghana	Infrastructure	Investment	Fund.	This	fund	
will	enable	us	to	disaggregate	our	debt	profile	and	transfer	infrastructure	investments	
with	a	revenue	generating	capacity	from	the	public	debt.	Institutions	such	as	Ghana	Gas,	
VRA,	GPHA,	GACL,	GNPC	and	other	public	and	private	institutions	would	be	able	to	finance	
their	investments	through	this	window	without	burdening	the	public	debt	stock.	This	
should	significantly	improve	our	debt	sustainability	profile.
We	will	work	with	our	development	partners	and	other	multi-lateral	associates	to	ensure	
that	Ghana	continues	on	the	path	of	accelerated	growth	and	equitable	development	into	
the	future.
b.		Foreign	Exchange	
Mr.	Speaker	,	recent	measures	announced	by	the	Bank	of	Ghana	in	response	to	the	
depreciation	of	the	cedi	created	some	concern	among	the	business	and	investment	
community.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	Ghana	still	remains	the	most	attractive	investment	destination	in	West	Africa	
and	guarantees	peace,	safety,	stability	and	security.	I	wish	to	assure	investors	that	all	
34
agreements	governing	their	investments	remain	in	force	and	repatriation	of	profits	and	
dividends	are	guaranteed.	The	BOG	has clarified	its	regulations	in	respect	of	foreign	
currency	accounts	and	it	is	my	hope	that	this	has	allayed	the	concerns	of	both	the	
domestic	and	foreign	investor	communities.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	Ghana	has	come	from	the	environment	in	the	70’s	and	early	80’s	when	a	
command	and	control	economy	led	to	a	strict	regulation	of	foreign	exchange.		Reforms	in	
the	mid	80’s	saw	the	introduction	of	forex	bureaus	and	the	liberalization	of	the	foreign	
exchange	regime.	In	this	transition	we	moved	from	one	extreme	to	another,	a	situation	in	
which	control	of	forex	was	so	lax,	that	Ghana	was	fast	becoming	a	source	of	foreign	
exchange	for	our	neighbours.	Huge	transactions	in	millions	of	dollars	were	being	
conducted	in	forex	bureaus.		This	had	not	been	the	original	intention.	
Dwindling	confidence	in	our	currency	led	to	a	situation	where	people	hedged	on	the	dollar.	
Persons	with	excess	cedis	converted	them	into	dollars	and	deposited	them	in	their	foreign	
exchange	accounts.	We	had	a	situation	where	forex	holdings	on	behalf	of	businesses	and	
individuals	in	our	commercial	banks	amounted	to	over	$3	billion.
In	addition,	our	economy	had	become	increasingly	dollarized.	Hotel	room	rates,	vehicles,	
rents,	school	fees,	household	appliances,	consumer	items,	cosmetics,	clothes	and	other	
items were	all	quoted	in	dollars.	The	obvious	problem	with	this	is	that	the	dollar	is	not	our	
national	currency.		The	currency	of	Ghana	is	the	cedi,	and	the	cedi	will	only	gain	strength	if	
we	begin	to	view	and	use	it	as	that,	our	nation’s	only	currency.		The	Attorney	General	and	
the	EOCO	have	been	charged	to	monitor	the	situation	and	severely	sanction	any	institution	
advertising	rates	or	prices	and	charging	in	foreign	currency.	A	directive	to	the	same	effect	
has	also	been	issued	to	government	agencies.	
c.		Transforming	our	economy
Mr.	Speaker	,	the	basic	structure	of	our	economy	has	not	changed	from	colonial	times.	The	
Gold	Coast	was	designed	by	the	colonial	masters	to	be	exporters	of	raw	material	and	
importers	of	finished	goods.	This	is	what	best	served	their	needs	and	purposes.		
After	independence	our	first	President	Osagyefo	Dr.	Kwame	Nkrumah	of	blessed	memory,	
sought	to	break	this	vicious	cycle	by	establishing	numerous	state	owned	industries	to	
produce	consumer	products	for	the	domestic	market	as	an	import substitution	measure.	
35
Unfortunately,	the	management	of	these	enterprises	became	a	challenge	and	soon	they	
turned	into	a	very	huge	expense	on	the	budget.	A	decision	was	made	to	divest	these	
enterprises	to	the	private	sector.	Unfortunately,	in	many	cases,	the	domestic	private	
sector	was	unable	to	leverage	the	financing	needed	to	revamp	these	industries	and	bring	
them	back	into	production.
Mr.	Speaker	 the	result	is	that	we	are	still	largely	dependent	on	the	export	of	raw	material,	
gold,	cocoa,	timber,	oil	and	mineral	exports	and	on	the	import	of	finished	goods.		That	is	
still	the	basic	structure	of	our	economy.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	a	fundamental	problem	of	our	economy	is	that	we	do	not	make	what	we	
consume.		This	is	the	situation	the	late	General	Acheampong	sought	to	address	with	the	
“Operation	Feed	Yourself”	and	“Operation	Feed	Your	Industries”	programmes,	which	
were	aimed	at	strengthening	Ghana’s	ability	to	be	self-reliant.			
Mr.	Speaker	,	in	2013	alone	we	spent	a	whopping	amount	of	almost	$1.5	billion	in	foreign	
currency	on	the	import	of	rice,	sugar,	wheat,	tomato	products,	frozen	fish,	poultry	and	
vegetable	cooking	oils.		Rice	accounted	for	$374	million,	fish	$283.3	million,	wheat	$226.7	
million,	poultry	$169.2	million,	cooking	oils	$127	million,	tomato	products	$112.1	million.
Mr.	Speaker,	imagine	if	this	money	had	been	retained	in	Ghana.		Imagine	if	it	had	gone	into	
the	pockets	of	Ghanaian	entrepreneurs	who	would,	in	turn,	spend	those	cedis	at	markets,	
restaurants,	beauty	shops,	pharmacies,	shopping	centres and	other	Ghanaian	enterprises.		
When	Ghanaians	produce	goods	that	other	Ghanaians	use,	they	are	then	able	to	re-invest	
that	revenue	back	into	the	very	communities	that	patronized	them.		The	money	flows	in	a	
current,	and	it	fortifies	the	nation’s	economy.		That,	Mr.	Speaker,	is	the	best	use	of	a	
nation’s	currency.		Imagine	all	that	we	could	achieve	if	in	one	year,	we	could	spend	as	
much	in	cedis	on	locally	produced	rice,	sugar,	wheat,	tomato	products,	frozen	fish,	poultry,	
vegetable	and	cooking	oils,	as	we	spent	in	dollars	on	those	very	same	imported	items	last	
year.		Just	imagine!
Mr.	Speaker	,	as	we	all	know,	raw	material	exports	are	subject	to	price	fluctuations	on	the	
international	market.	Countries	that	are	dependent	on	raw	material	exports	are	therefore	
subject	to	wild	cycles	of	booms	and	busts.	
36
Mr.	Speaker	,	57	years	after	independence,	we	need	to	take	pause	and	ask	ourselves	some	
critical	questions.	Can	the	current	structure	of	our	economy	carry	us	to	the	next	level?	
What	changes	must	we	make	to create	an	economic	structure	that	will	serve	our	needs	
and	purposes?	
Mr.	Speaker	,	between	2012	and	2013	Ghana	lost	$1.3	billion	in	export	revenues	on	account	
of	the	decline	in	cocoa	and	gold	prices.	At	the	same	time	our	import	bill	rose	dramatically	
to $17	billion.
Can	we,	as	a	nation,	continue	this	unbridled	importation	of	everything	from	plastic	dolls	to	
toothpicks?	Must	we	continue	to	rely	on	a	narrow	band	of	raw	material	exports?	Were	we	
born	to	be	a	nation	of	only	shopkeepers	and	traders?	My	definite	response	to	these	
questions	is	NO!
Once	more,	Mr.	Speaker	,	we	return	to	the	need	for	change	in	order	to	facilitate	growth.		
We	must	change	the	structure	of	our	economy.	We	must	reduce	the	importation	of	items	
that	we	have	a	comparative	advantage	to	produce.	We	must	add	value	to	our	exports	
through	primary,	secondary	and	tertiary	processing:		add	value	to	our	cocoa	by	increased	
domestic	processing;	refine	our	gold	before	export;	pursue	Nkrumah’s	dream	of	an	
integrated	bauxite	and	alumina	industry.	We	must	revamp	Tema	Oil	Refinery,	revive	BOST,	
VALCO,	Tema	Shipyard	and	Drydock	and	the	many	other	strategic	industries	that	serve	as	
extra	pillars	for	our	economy.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	in	compliance	with	the	Constitution	I	am	required	to	present	this	house	with	
a	medium	term	development	framework	before	the	close	of	this	year.	I	have	dialogued	
with	the	NDPC	that	is	working	on	this	plan	and	urged	them	to	come	out	with	a	plan	that	
fundamentally	addresses	this	weakness	in	the	structure	of	our	economy.	I	have	specifically	
tasked	them	to	handle	the	process	in	a	way	as	to	create	a	buy-in	from	all	Ghanaians	
irrespective	of	political	affiliation	or	societal	status.		This	is	not	a	time	to	stand	divided	
along	any	lines;	this	is	not	the	time	to	stand	on	the	sidelines;	this	is	the	time	for	us	to	stand	
together,	as	Ghanaians,	on	the	side	of	Ghana.
In	the	interim,	to	kick	start	this	process	of	transformation,	I	have	tasked	the	Minister	of	
Trade	and	Industry	to	request	that	the	Export	Development	and	Agriculture	Investment	
37
Fund	extend	assistance	to	local	investors	for	increased	production	of	poultry,	rice,	
tomatoes,	cooking	oil,	and	fish.
Mr.	Speaker	,	financing	has	been	finalized	for	the	construction	of	a	new	sugar	processing	
plant	in	Komenda	in	the	Central	Region.		We	are	also	in	discussion	with	another	private	
sector	investor	about	the	establishment	of	another	sugar	processing	plant	in	the	north	
near	Savelugu.	I	have	requested	that	the	Hon.	Minister	of	Trade	and	Industry	give	these	
two	projects	his	personal	attention.
Mr.	Speaker	,	I	have	also	tasked	the	Minister	to	speak	with	the	operators	of	flour	mills	and	
introduce	incentives	for	production	of	composite	flours	that	incorporate	more	local	flour	
from	products	like	cassava,	maize,	sorghum	etc.
It	is	my	intention	to	commence	work	this	year	on	the	realization	of	the	integrated	bauxite	
and	aluminium	industry,	including	the	revamping	of	VALCO.
A	joint	venture	agreement	between	TOR	and	Petro	Saudi	is	being	finalized	to	revamp	the	
operations	of	our	oil	refinery.	This	will	reduce	the huge	amount	of	forex	we	expend	on	the	
importation	of	finished	petroleum	products.	
A	Transactions	Advisor	is	being	selected	to	guide	the	process	of	choosing	a	strategic	
partner	to	invest	in	the	Tema	Shipyard	and	Dry	dock	Industry.
I	have	asked	the	Ghana Cocoa	Board	to	enter	into	a	strategic	partnership	to	produce	jute	
sacks	in	Ghana.	This	will	start	by	the	importation	of	the	jute	fibres	and	the	sewing	of	the	
sacks	locally.	It	will	eventually	backward	integrate	into	the	production	of	kenaf	and	the	
weaving of	the	jute	fibres	locally.	Cocobod	will,	at	that	time,	be	required	to	halt	the	
importation	of	jute	sacks	and	buy	all	its	sacks	from	this	factory.
I	have	asked	the	Board	and	Management	of	the	Electricity	Company	of	Ghana	to	
encourage	the	local	manufacture	of	electrical	products	like	cables,	transformers,	meters	
etc	by	purchasing	from	local	producers	who	meet	their	quality	standard.	
Mr.	Speaker	,	we	will	this	year	launch	a	broad	campaign	to	encourage	Ghanaians	to	buy	
made-in-Ghana	goods.	Any	import	item	we	buy	as	Ghanaians	constitutes	an	export	of	jobs	
38
out	of	our	country,	especially	in	respect	of	items	for	which	we	have	a	comparative	
advantage	to	produce.
Mr.	Speaker	,	last	week	I	held	several	meetings	with	a	host	of	leaders	in	the	business	
community,	from	large	corporations	to	medium	and	small-scale	enterprises,	companies	as	
wide-ranging	as	CalBank,	FinaTrade,	and	Scancom	to	Sethi	Industries,	Beige	Capital,	Reroy	
Cables	and	Agbeve	Herbal.		
The	purpose	of	these	meetings	was	to	open	an	honest	and	easy	exchange	of	ideas	and	
information	between	Government	and	the	private	sector.		The	better	we	are	able	to	assist	
one	another,	the	faster	we	can	all	help	to	strengthen	the	economy	by	building	a	Ghana	
that	is	self-sufficient	and	successful.
Mr.	Speaker	,	I	was	encouraged	and	inspired	by	these	meetings.		The	determined,	
hardworking,	visionary	men	and	women	I	met	reaffirmed	my	belief	that	Ghanaians	are	
more	than	capable	of	creating	industries	to	sustain	this	country.		I	met	Mr.	Magnus	Nunoo,	
President	of	the	National	Association	of	Sachet	and	Packaged	Water	Producers.		Mr.	
Nunoo	spoke	to	me	with	the	eloquence	and	knowledge	of	an	economist;	and	why	not?		
Mr.	Nunoo	attended	schools	in	Cape	Coast,	Ningo	and	Labone;	he	read	Economics	at	
Legon.		Mr.	Nunoo	introduced	the packaging	of	water	in	sachets	and	he	now	employs	over	
100,000	people.		Mr.	Nunoo	even	found	value	in	his	industry’s	waste,	and	became	a	
proponent	of	commercial-scale	plastic	waste	management.
Mr.	Speaker	,	at	this	same	meeting,	I	also	made	an	acquaintance	of	Mr.	Tony	Senayah,	of	
Horseman	Shoes,	a	company	he	started	in	2009	by	buying	and	selling	locally	made	shoes	
from	a	manufacturer	in	LaPaz.	It	had	always	been	Mr.	Senayah’s	dream	to	build	a	
vocational	training	institute.		One	day	he	saw	a	business	opportunity.		He	realized	that	a	lot	
of	the	young	people	he	knew	were	skilled	at	making	shoes,	but	beyond	that	they	didn’t	
know	how	to	make	their	work	economically	viable.		Suddenly	he	saw	a	way	to	create	
employment	for	young	people.		He	recruited	them	to	make	the	shoes	that	he	designed.		
And,	Mr.	Speaker,	I	tell	you:	they	are	very	nice,	very	comfortable	shoes.		In	fact,	I	am	
wearing	a	pair	right	now.
39
This,	Mr	Speaker,	this	is	what	I	mean	when	I	say	“Made	In	Ghana”.	The	people	as	well	as	
the	products.	Who	we	are as	Ghanaians	has	always	been	the	driving	force	behind	what	we	
do	and	how	we	do	it.	This	country	is	more	than	capable	of	consistently	delivering	quality—
in	people,	in	performance,	in	products—if	only	we	demand	it	of	ourselves.	
d.		Agriculture	and	Food	Security
Mr	Speaker,	despite	the	fact	that	the	agricultural	sector	has	lost	its	prime	spot	as	the	
largest	contributor	to	GDP	to	the	services	sector,	agriculture	remains	a	key	priority	of	
Government.		Government’s	vision	to	ensure	food	security	in	Ghana	has	been	largely	
achieved.		This	has	even	been	acknowledged	by	the	international	community.	Last	year,	
2013,	the	UN	Food	and	Agriculture	Organisation	(FAO)	and	the	AU/Forum	for	Agricultural	
Research	in	Africa	(FARA)	recognized	Ghana	for	achieving	the	MDG	of	reducing	hunger	
and	malnutrition	in	advance	of	the	2015	target	date.		The	award	was	received	by	the	
Minister	for	Agriculture	on	my	behalf,	and	it	was	dedicated	to	all	the	hardworking	farmers	
of	Ghana.	I	take	the	opportunity	to	salute	my	predecessors,	President	Jerry	John	Rawlings,	
John	Agyekum	Kufuor,	John	Evans	Atta	Mills	(of	blessed	memory)	for	the	role	they	all	
played	in	helping	us	achieve	this	feat.
Mr	Speaker,	through	the	use	of	improved	planting	material,	subsidized	fertilizers,	
extension	services,	and	access	to	credit	we	have	achieved	surpluses	in	our	traditional	
staple	crops:	cassava,	yam,	plantain	and	maize.	This	has	enhanced	food	security	in	Ghana,	
as	these	foods	are	now	plentiful	in	the	market	at	reasonable	prices.
And	to	continue	on	this	positive	note,	Mr	Speaker,	I	would	like	to	report	that	even	with	the	
huge	volume	and	value	of	our	rice	imports,	our	local	rice	production	has	seen	a	significant	
increase	of	about	60%.	This	has	necessitated	the	establishment	by	the	private	sector	of	
two	new	rice-processing	factories	in	Nyankpala	in	the	Northern	Region	and	Sogakope	in	
the	Volta	Region.		Another	rice	processing	factory	is	planned	for	Atsutuare	in	the	Greater	
Accra	Region.	
Despite	these	successes,	many	challenges	still	confront	the	industry.		Access	to	credit,	lack	
of	mechanized	equipment	for	large-scale	commercial	rice	production,	non-availability	of	
sufficient	irrigated	lands;	all	of	these	conditions	constrain	increased	rice	production.		
40
However,	Government	is	focused	on	partnering	with	the	private	sector	to	eliminate	as	
many	of	these	constrains	as	possible.							
Mr	Speaker,	in	this	regard,	within	the	past	year,	Government	completed	rehabilitation	
work	on	some	viable	irrigation	schemes	and	added	more	than	1,200	hectares	of	land	to	the	
stock	of	irrigable	land,	mainly	for	rice	production.	Another	8,000	hectares have	been	
added	by	the	private	sector,	to	supplement	nearly	6,000	hectares of	land	in	the	three	
Northern	regions	alone.	That	is	15,200	hectares	of	land	total,	all	devoted	to	rice	cultivation.	
It	is	my	firm	belief	that	if	we	maintain	this	progress,	we	are	making	in	rice	production,	
Ghana	will,	in	the	near	future,	become	a	net	exporter	of	rice.
Mr	Speaker,	as	I	said	earlier,	we	achieved	surpluses	in	our	traditional	staple	crops	including	
cassava.		Cassava	is	the	most	consumed	crop	per	capita	in	Ghana.		An	abundance	of	
cassava,	therefore,	represents	a	good	source	of	income	for	our	farmers,	but	it	also	
guarantees	the	availability	of	local	foods	such	as	banku,	tuo	zafi,	gari,	kokonte	and	fufu.
Mr	Speaker,	when	left	to	our	devices,	we	Ghanaians	are	exceptionally	innovative	and	
industrious.		Lately	cassava	has	also	been	serving	as	a	profitable	input	for	the	brewery	
industry.	With	the	introduction	of	a	new	sliding	scale	for	excise	based	on	the	use	of	local	
inputs,	the	breweries	have	been	incentivized	to	introduce	sorghum	and	cassava	into	beer	
production.		These	new	brands	are	proving	to	be	quite	popular	with	consumers.	This	has	
been	made	possible	as	a	result	of	the	availability	of	6	million	tons	of	extra	cassava,	over	
and	above	our	national	demand.		The	introduction	of	improved	varieties,	plus	a	welldeveloped
value	chain	as	well	as	the	development	of	business	oriented	viable	Farmer	
Based	Organizations	(FBOs)	has	been	the	basis	of	this	achievement.
Mr	Speaker,	we	have	sustained	our	programme	of	subsidies	for	fertilizer	and	improved	
seeds.	The	fertilizer	subsidy	programme	has	increased	in	quantity	from	below	50,000	
metric	tonnes	in	2008	when	it	was	initiated	to	150,000	metric	tonnes	in	2013.	This	year,	
2014,	the	subsidy	is	expected	to	cover	a	volume	of	180,000	metric	tonnes.	I	am	also	
pleased	to	report	that	as	a	result	of	measures	put	in	place,	the	incidence	of	smuggling	of	
the	product	has	largely	been	curtailed.
Under	the	livestock	production	programme,	the	Animal	Production	Division	of	the	Ministry	
of	Agriculture	is	assisting	farmers	in	the	sub-sector	to	improve	the	quality	and	quantity	of	
meat	they	supply	to	the	market.
41
Mr	Speaker,	Government’s	objective	is	to	position	agriculture	as	a	truly	viable	and	
attractive	area	for	private	capital,	just	as	we	are	seeing	with	mining,	petroleum	and	
housing.	I	call	on	the	private	sector	to	partner	with	us	to	create	these	new	instruments	
that	can	allow	us	to	share	both	the	risk	and	benefits	of	such	large-scale	undertakings,	
which	will	trigger	a	more	sustainable	transformation,	to	deliver	prosperity	to	our	people.
Mr	Speaker,	I	am	pleased	to	report	that	we’re	entering	in	some	of	these	partnerships	
already	in	the	area	of	irrigation	development.	Collaboration	between	government	
institutions	and	private	agribusiness	groups	is	underway	to	deliver	almost	30,000	hectares	
of	irrigated	land	under	the	Sissili-Kulpawn	project	in	the	West	Mamprusi	area	of	the	
Northern	Region.
Mr	Speaker,	environmental	impact	assessment	studies	are	also	underway	for	a	combined	
irrigation,	flood	control	and	hydroelectric	power	station	at	Pwalugu	in	the	Upper	East	
region.	The	Ghana	Commercial	Agriculture	Project	(GCAP)	funded	by	the	USAID	and	the	
World	Bank	is	working	with	traditional	authorities	in	the	Nasia	river	catchment	area	for	
another	irrigation	project.
Mr	Speaker,	as	mentioned	earlier,	work	will	commence	on	a	new	sugar	factory	at	
Komenda	this	year.	This	will	be	supported	with	an	irrigation	scheme	for	high	yield	sugar	
cane	plantation	to	feed	the	factory.	The	factory	is	expected	to	create	jobs	and	
employment	especially	within	the	catchment	area,	and	produce	value-added	bi-products	
such	as	energy	and	alcohol.
e.		Trade	&	Industry	
Since	the	establishment	of	the	Free	Zones	in	the	early	90s,	a	lot	of	progress	has	been	made	
in	attracting	serious	investors	into	the	processing	zone.		Mr	Speaker,	the	Export	
Processing	Zone	is	being	positioned	to	attract	more	export-oriented	investments	that	can	
generate	foreign	exchange,	create	employment	and	improve	livelihoods.	
42
The	Ghana	Free	Zones	Board	licensed	23	new	companies	that	are	expected	to	generate	
more	than	10,000	new	jobs	over	the	next	three	years.
		
Mr	Speaker,	globalization	and	trade	liberalization	have	brought	in	their	wake	a	number	of	
unfair	trading	practices	such	as	dumping	by	foreign	exporters.	We	are	aware	of	the	
difficulties	encountered	by	some	domestic	companies	as	a	result	of	these	unfair	trading	
practices.	
To	check	these	practices	we	will,	in	the	course	of	this	year,	submit	to	Parliament	a Bill	on	
the	establishment	of	a	Ghana	International	Trade	Commission	(GITC),	which	will	enable	our	
nation	to	take	advantage	of	the	remedies	on	piracy,	anti-dumping	and	countervailing	
measures.	The	overall	effect	of	this	commission	would	be	to	boost	our	domestic	and	
international	competitiveness.	
--Local	content	boosting	the	Ghanaian	private	sector.	
Mr	Speaker,	we	have	passed	the	local	content	law	for	the	Oil	and	Gas	industry.		This	will	
allow	the	Ghanaian	private	sector	to	participate	fully	in	the	multi-million	dollar	contracts	
awarded	in	the	industry.	With	the	passage	of	this	bill,	Ghanaian	registered	companies	must	
quickly	build	capacity	to	compete	in	tenders	advertised	by	the	oil	companies.
			
Mr	Speaker,	Government	will	also	use	its	financial	muscle	to	boost	the	Ghanaian	private	
sector.	Their	success	is	everybody’s	success.		Their	prosperity	is	one	that	will	ultimately	
benefit	the	entire	nation.	Ghanaian	registered	companies	that	are	up	to	date	in	their	
corporate	obligations	would	be	given	preference	in	bids	under	a	revised	Public	
Procurement	Act	soon	to	be	laid	before	Parliament.	Government	agencies	would	be	
compelled	to	give	first	consideration	in	procurement	to	goods	and	services	made	in	Ghana.	
Value	for	money	and	quality	will	not	be	compromised	in	the	process.
43
--Ghana	Commodity	Exchange	(GCX)	
Mr	Speaker,	as	part	of	efforts	to	create	an	orderly,	transparent,	and	efficient	marketing	
system	for	Ghana’s	key	agricultural	commodities	to	promote	agricultural	investment	and	
enhance	productivity,	the	Government	has	committed	itself	to	the	establishment	of	a	
Ghana	Commodity	Exchange	(GCX)	and	associated	Warehouse	Receipt	System	(WRS).	This	
move	is	to	encourage	market	access	and	fair	returns	for	smallholder	farmers,	and	to	
facilitate	the	formalization	of	informal	agricultural	trading	activities.		It	is	expected	that	the	
establishment	of	the	Ghana	Commodity	Exchange	will	position	it	as	a	West	Africa	Regional	
Hub	for	commodity	trading	activities.
--Economic	Partnership	Agreement
Mr Speaker, regarding the Economic Partnership Agreement with the EU, the West Africa
Regional bloc is in negotiations.		In	the	interest	of	regional	solidarity,	Ghana	is	committed	
to	the	collective	position	of	the	Economic	Community	of	West	African	States	(ECOWAS)	in	
conformity	with	the region’s	common	goal.	I	am optimistic about the process of
negotiation between the EU and ECOWAS and believe that an equitable and developmentoriented
regional EPA Agreement will be concluded in line with Market Access
Regulations.		Ghana must, however, consider traditional measures to guarantee market
access seeing as a regional partnership agreement would not have been ratified before the
deadline of 14th October of this year.
Mr	Speaker,	Government	will	support	the	Ghanaian	industrial	sector	to	enable it	to	
generate	jobs,	reduce	poverty,	and	increase	manufactured	exports.	This	will	include	
affordable	financial	credit	for	retooling	and	expansion.
--Ports	and	Trade	Facilitation
As	part	of	measures	to	decongest	the	ports	and	facilitate	trade,	more	non-intrusive	cargo	
scanners	will	be	deployed	in	2014	at	the	various	ports	and	major	border	posts.		I	have	also	
directed	the	Minister	for	Finance	to	initiate	the	revision	of	the	relevant	legislative	
instruments	to	extend	the	time	for	goods	meant	for	warehousing	from	3	p.m.	to	7.30	p.m.	
44
This	will	also	facilitate	the	delivery	of	a	twenty-four	hour	service	by	the	Customs	Division	of	
the	Ghana	Revenue	Authority.	
Mr	Speaker,	we	will	reduce	the	time	and	transaction	costs	of	clearance	at	the	ports.	The	
case	where	importers	must	pay	demurrages	as	a	result	of	inefficiencies	not	caused	by	
these	importers	but	by	state	agencies	will	be	corrected.
--Investment	Promotion
Mr	Speaker,	a	new	Ghana	Investment	Promotion	Act	is	in	force	to	regulate	investment	into	
the	country.		The	GIPC	supported	by	the	Ministry	of	Trade	and	Industry	and	the	Ministry	of	
Foreign	Affairs	and	Regional	Integration	has	started	embarking	on	aggressive	Trade	and	
Investment	Promotion	activities	in	the	coming	years.	We	have	plans	to	establish	Trade	
Offices	in	China,	Turkey,	South	Africa	and	Japan.	
--Tourism
The	Tourism		and	the	creative	sector	are	a	major	contributor	to	our	economic	growth.	In	
2013	the	sector	maintained	its	position	as	the fourth	highest	foreign	exchange	earner	after	
Gold,	Cocoa	and	remittances	from	Ghanaians	abroad.	International	arrivals	and	receipts	
grew	by	10%,	rising	from	903,300	in	2012	to	993,600	in	2013	resulting	in	an	increase	from	
US$	1.7	Billion	to	US$1.9	and	contributing	4.7%	to	GDP.	
In	terms	of	employment	a	total	of	319,000	jobs	were	created	in	both	formal	and	informal	
tourism	enterprises.	With	appropriate	investments	in	this	sector,	tourism	can	become	a	
leading	revenue	earner	for	our	economy.	We	will	invest	also	in	the	creative	industries,	
which	have	become	a	major	source	of	employment	and	income	for	thousands	of	our	
people.
PILLAR	III:		EXPANDING	INFRASTRUCTURE	FOR	GROWTH
45
Mr.	Speaker,	just	as	the	basic	structure	of	our	economy	has	remained	virtually	unchanged	
since	our	transition	to	a	free,	self-governing	nation,	our	basic	infrastructure	has	not	been	
greatly	expanded	since	the	early	days	of	our	liberation.	Back	then	our	population	was	
significantly	smaller	and	distributed	more	evenly	between	the	urban	and	rural	areas.	
Mr.	Speaker,	in	2000	Ghana’s	population	was	roughly	18.9 million;	by	2010	it	had	increased	
by	more	than	30%	to	24.6	million.		In	order	to	sustain	and	enhance	our	projected	rate	of	
growth	over	the	long	term,	it	is	absolutely	necessary	that	we	develop	and	expand	our	
infrastructure	to	support	expanded	economic	activity	and	to	guarantee	rapid	
socioeconomic	development.	Current	estimates	indicate	an	annual	funding	gap	of	about	
four	billion	cedis	if	we	are	to	effectively	tackle	our	infrastructure	challenges	and	expand	
them	as	a	catalyst	for	growth.	
Mr.	Speaker,	following	the	announcement	by	the	Hon	Minister	for	Finance	when	he	
presented	the	2014	Budget	Estimates	to	this	august	house,	I	have	moved	quickly	to	set	up	
an	Advisory	team	to	lead	the	way	for	the	operationalization	of	the	Ghana	Infrastructure	
Fund.
Mr.	Speaker,	we	made	clear	commitments	to	the	nation	in	the	2012	manifesto	to	embark	
on	an	aggressive	expansion	of	the	country’s	infrastructure.	Pursuant	to	this	commitment,	
a	number	of	major	investments	have	been	made	as	part	of	our	strategic	infrastructure	
programme	in	the	road,	transport,	energy,	water,	housing	and	communications	sectors.
a.		Roads
Mr.	Speaker,	every	single	day,	we	trust	our	roads	to	carry	our	children,	spouses,	parents	
and	friends	safely	to	and	from	school,	work,	appointments,	villages	and	hometowns.		We	
trust	our	roads	for	the	reliable	transport	and	delivery	of	food	and	beverages,	clothing	and	
other	merchandise.		When	our	roads	are	not	adequately	maintained	or	repaired,	we	face	
the	possibility	of	losing	precious	lives,	losing	much-needed	revenue	and	losing	time	that	
could	have	been	better	spent	doing	something	other	than	sitting	in	traffic.	
46
Mr.	Speaker,	when	I	delivered	the	State	of	the	Nation	Address	last	year,	I	informed	this	
House	of	my	government’s	desire	to	transform	the	Kwame	Nkrumah	Circle	into	a	modern	
three-tier	interchange	to	eliminate	the	human	and	vehicular	congestion	that	has	come	to	
be	associated	with	that	very	busy	intersection.	I	am	happy	to	report	that	I	cut	the	sod	for	
construction	to	begin	on	the	interchange	last	year	and	work	is	currently	ongoing.
Mr.	Speaker,	we	are	making	similar	progress	on	many	other	road	projects	in	various	parts	
of	the	country.	We	are	on	schedule	to	complete	the	147-kilometre	Fufulso- Sawla	Road	in	
the	Northern	Region.	That	long	stretch	of	road,	which is	being	constructed	for	the	first	
time	in	history,	has	completely	transformed	the	catchment	area	that	it	covers.	Even	before	
completion	of	the	road,	it	is	being	reported	that	economic	activity	and	tourist	arrivals	at	
the	Mole	Game	Reserve	have	increased.
Within	Accra,	work	is	also	progressing	on	a	number	of	traffic	improvement	roads,	and	I	
must	acknowledge	the	messages	of	appreciation	received	from	residents	of	Teshie	
Tebibiano	and	surrounding	communities	following	the	fast	track	reshaping	of	the	road	
linking	the	area	to	the	main	Accra-Tema	beach	road.	Several	road	works	are	ongoing	in	the	
Accra	urban	roads	district.	30	kilometers	of	road	have	been	completed	in	the	Garden	city	
of	Kumasi,	many	of	these	are	in	the	Suame	and	Asawase	constituencies	(Abawa	Ruth,	
Bremang	UGC,	Sepe	Dote,	Abusuakruwa,	Sawaba	area,	Adukrom,	Asokore	Mampon	roads.	
Mr.	Speaker,	in	2013,	significant	progress	was	made	on	other	important	road	projects	in	
various	parts	of	the	country.	These	include	the	Tarkwa-Ayanfuri-Bogoso,	sectional repairs	
on	Tarkwa-Prestea	the	Central	Corridor	Road,	consisting	of	Nsawam	By-Pass,	Kwafokrom	–
Apedwa,	Techiman-Kintampo,	Buipe	– Tamale;	the	Eastern	Corridor	Road,	consisting	of	
Asikuma	Junction	– Kpeve;	Dodo-Pepesu	to	Nkwanta,	Nkwanta	– Oti	Damanko.	The
Coastal	Corridor	Road,	consisting	of	Aflao-Agbozume-Akatsi,	and	Agona	Junction	to	Elubo	
Road;	Accra	East	Corridor	roads,	that	is	Giffard		and	Burma	Camp	Roads;	and	the	Accra	
West	Corridor	that	is	the	Awoshie-Pokuase	Road.	Work	will	continue	on	the	WalewaleGambaga,
Navrongo-Tumu,	Tamale	–Salaga,	Kintampo-Abease	and	Atebubu-Kwame	Danso	
47
road.		Work	will	start	this	year	on	the	Lawra-Han-Tumu	road.	Installation	of	bridges	is	also	
ongoing	to	open	up	the	road	from	Walewale	to	Wa.	
Mr	Speaker,	the	60	km	Anwia-Nkwanta-Assin	Praso	road	has	been	reconstructed	with	a	
new	bridge	spanning	River	Pra.	This	project	will	be	commissioned	in	the	coming	weeks.
Mr	Speaker,	in	2013,	across	the	country,	we	undertook	critical	maintenance	work	on	a	total	
of	15,405	km	of	trunk,	urban	and	feeder	roads.		This	year,	in	addition	to	ensuring	speedy	
completion	of	the	ongoing	projects,	we	will	commence	a	number	of	new	road	projects	
aimed	at	further	opening	up	the	country	and	facilitating	the	free	movement	of	people	as	
well	as	enhancing	economic	activity.	These	projects	include	the	25km	Kasoa	bypass,	and	
town	roads	in	Sekondi-Takoradi,	Nyarkrom,	Gwolu,	Bole,	Manfi-Kumasi,	Kpetoe,	Moree,	
Old	Tafo	and	Fomena-Anyasi.	
b.		Transport	
Mr.	Speaker,	we	have	always	been	fond	of	referring	to	Ghana	as	the	gateway	to	West	
Africa,	but	more	and	more	it’s	looking	like	Ghana	is	becoming	a	gateway	to	the	rest	of	
Africa	as	well.		A	reliable,	efficient,	cost-effective	and	modern	transportation	system	is	
required	to	fast	track	our	transition	from	a	lower	middle-income	to	a	fully-fledged	middleincome
status.	To	this	end	we	have,	over	the	last	few	years,	been	putting	in	place	the	
building	blocks	for	reaching	this	goal.
A	well-coordinated	port	infrastructure	expansion	programme	has	commenced	at	both	the	
Tema	and	Takoradi	harbours.		The	purpose	of	these	projects,	Mr.	Speaker,	is	to	position	
the	ports	in	readiness	for	enhanced	port	business,	targeting	our	landlocked	neighbours,	
larger	vessels	and	the	oil	and	gas	sector.	
Infrastructure	development	projects	are	major	job	creation	avenues,	and	these	ongoing	
works	are	creating	thousands	of	jobs.		As	we	prepare	for	the	start	of	work	on	the	
48
upgrading	of	the	Tamale	Airport,	we	can	be	assured	of	new	job	opportunities	in	the	city.		
This	will	be	resulting	from	new	and	improved	eco	and	cultural	tourism	opportunities,	as	
well	as	support	the	agricultural	sector	by	leveraging	exports	of	fresh	produce	and	agrobased
industries.
Mr.	Speaker,	work	is	progressing	on	the	rehabilitation	and	expansion	projects	at	the	
Kotoka	International	Airport	(KIA).	The	parking	apron	for	wide-bodied	aircraft	has	been	
completed.	Expansion	of	the	arrival	hall	will	be	carried	out	to	create	more	space	for	the	
increased	number	of	passengers	arriving	at	Kotoka	each	day.	Adverts	would	soon	be	
placed	for	the	construction	of	a	new	terminal	at	the	Kotoka	Airport.		This	terminal	to	be	
known	as	terminal	3	will	take	the	pressure	of	terminal	2,	so	that	rehabilitation	of	that	
terminal	can	take	off	in	earnest.
Work	is	ongoing	on	the	resurfacing	of	the	Kumasi	Airport	runway.	Runway	lights	and	
modern	navigation	systems	are	being	installed	and	work	should	be	completed	within	a	few	
months.		This	will	allow	aircraft	to	land	at	all	times	through	the	day	and	into	the	night	time.	
Passengers	arriving	on	long	haul	aircraft	at	night	and	wishing	to	continue	directly	to	
Kumasi	would	be	able	to	connect	by	domestic	carriers.	Designs	for	aerodromes	in	Ho,	
Bolgatanga,	and	Cape	Coast	are	being	done	and	should	be	ready	soon.	
Mr.	Speaker,	before	the	end	of	my	first	term,	Ghana	will	witness	a	revival	of	its	railway	
transport	service,	carting	export	produce	to	the	ports	and	safely	carrying	commuters	over	
various	distances.	
I	have	directed	a	team	comprising	the	Minister	for	Finance	and	the	Minister	for	Transport	
to	actualize	my	plans	for	the	railway	sector	which	includes	the	construction	of	a	new	rail	
line	linking	the	Tema	and	Takoradi	ports	to	the	Boankra	Inland	Port,	as	a	way	of	attracting	
more	interest	and	revenue-generating	activity	from	our	landlocked	neighbours.	
49
Mr.	Speaker,	not	only	will	this	increase	the	life	span	of	our	roads,	but	it	will	improve	the	
speed	with	which	goods	bound	for	the	northern	sectors	of	Ghana	and	for	these	nearby	
landlocked	countries	are	received.	
c.		Energy
Mr.	Speaker,	the	damage	caused	in	2012	to	the	West	African	Gas	Pipelines	revealed	the	
flaws,	limitations	and	deficiencies	of	an	outdated	infrastructure	that	was	being	forced	to	
operate	beyond	its	capacity.	
Mr.	Speaker,	the	pledge	to	ramp	up	of	our	generation	capacity	to	5,000	MW	from	the	
current	levels	by	2016,	is	very	much	on	course.	While	we	were	confronted	with	managing	
the	dire	power	supply	challenges	of	2013,	we	were	not	short-sighted	in	our	resolve,	but	
also	started	working	towards	making	such	crises	a	thing	of	the	past.	
In	building	what	will be	a	resilient	energy	sector,	we	recognize	that	our	quest	to	expand	
the	manufacturing	sector,	enhance	industrialization	and	transform	the	structure	of	the	
economy	will	depend	on	the	availability	of	energy.		Government	is	accordingly	working	to	
guarantee	the	required	generation	capacity,	using	a	mix	of	generation	sources	including	
renewable	energy,	and	supply	from	independent	power	producers.	
A	total	of	534	megawatts	of	power	generation	was	added	in	2013,	bringing	our	total	
generation	capacity	to	2,845.	We	are	aggressively	pursuing	the	completion	of	a	number	of	
additional	power	generation	projects.	These	include	the	first	phase	of	a	220	megawatt	
Kpone	Thermal	Power	Plant,	completion	of	the	110-megawatt	T2	and	the	Volta	River	
Authority’s	12-megawatt	solar	project.		Mr	Speaker,	several	Independent	Power	Producers	
(IPPs)	will	also	commence	the	construction	of	new	power	plants	this	year.	
50
Mr.	Speaker,	increased	power	generation	capacity	must	be	supported	with	a	reliable	
transmission	system.	Government	policy	in	this	direction	is	aimed	at	developing	an	
efficient,	modern	and	non-congested	transmission	system	by	the	year	2015.		
To	attain	this,	a	number	of	projects	were	executed	in	2013.	Work	was	completed	on	the	
Kintampo	sub-station	to	ensure	the	evacuation	of	power	from	the	Bui	Hydroelectric	Dam	
and	to	also	improve	transmission	of	power	to	Kintampo	and	its	environs.
A	state-of-the-art	System	Control	Centre	has	been	set	up	to	improve	supervisory	control	
and	a	data	acquisition	system	that	now	enables	GRIDCO	to	perform	economic	dispatch	of	
generating	units.	Work	on	the	Tumu	– Han	–Wa	transmission	project	is	progressing	on	
schedule.
Mr.	Speaker,	last	year,	government	successfully	secured	funding	for	the	330kV	KumasiBolgatanga
Transmission	Line.		We	also	commenced work	to	reinforce	the	power	system	
in	Ghana	and	ensure	power	transfer	to	Burkina	Faso	and	other	Sahelian	countries	as	part	
of	the	West	African	Power	Pool	(WAPP).		
Arrangements	are	underway	to	secure	additional	funds	for	the	implementation	of	the	
Prestea–Kumasi	component	of	the	transmission	lines.
		
Mr.	Speaker,	we	are	concerned	about	the	customer	responsiveness	of	our	utility	
companies,	and	have	accordingly	charged	the	new	Boards	of	Directors	to	demand	and	
ensure	that	the	management	of	the	companies	draw	up	and	implement	efficient	and	
effective	customer	and	service	management	modules.	
Mr.	Speaker,	the	implementation	of	projects	under	the	National	Electrification	Scheme,	in	
line	with	my	‘Energy	for	All	Programme’,	has	been	stepped	up.	In	2013,	electrification	
51
projects	commenced	in	some	900	communities	in	Ghana.	These	projects	are	at	various	
stages	of	completion.	Ghana’s	electricity	connectivity	at	75%	is	currently	highest	in	subSaharan
Africa	after	South	Africa.		
Mr.	Speaker,	steady	progress	continues to	be	made	in	the	petroleum	sub-sector.	Average	
daily	production	from	the	Jubilee	Oil	Field	is	currently	102,969	barrels	a	day,	with	a	year	to	
date	average	daily	production	of	102,112	barrels	a	day.
The	TEN	field	Plan	of	Development	(PoD)	has	been	approved	paving	the	way	for	the	
exploitation	of	reserves	of	about	245	million	barrels	of	oil	and	367	billion	cubic	feet	of	gas,	
associated	and	non-associated.
The	Sankofa-Gye	Nyame	appraisal	activities	have	been	completed.	Both	oil	and	nonassociated
gas	discoveries	have	been	declared	commercial,	with	proven	reserves	of	116	
million	barrels	of	oil	and	in	excess	of	1,110	billion	cubic	feet	of	gas.		Four	Petroleum	
agreements	in	the	South	Deepwater	Tano	and	East	Cape	Three	Point	are	at	various	stages	
of	approval.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	3	components	of	the	Gas	Infrastructure	project,	which	consist	of	offshore	
pipeline,	onshore	pipeline	and	a	processing	plant,	have	reached	various	levels	of	
completion. The	offshore	pipeline	is	95	per	cent	complete	and	awaiting	precommissioning.
We	expect	the	plant	to	be	operational	in	the	2nd half	of	the	year.	
Mr.	Speaker,	as	part	of	efforts	to	discourage	the	reliance	on	wood	as	a	source	of	fuel,	
Government	will	launch	an	LPG	Promotion	Programme	aimed	at	reversing	the	deleterious	
effect the	continuous	burning	of	some	13	million	tons	of	firewood	annually	is	having	on	our	
environment.
52
The	programme	is	expected	to	achieve	50%	LPG	penetration	in	urban	areas	and	15%	in	rural	
areas.	Under	this	programme,	50,000	LPG	cylinders	will	be	distributed.	
d.		Water
Mr.	Speaker,	we	all	know	that	water	is	life.	Without	it,	neither	we,	nor	this	planet	could	
survive;	however,	this	simple	truth	holds	little	meaning	for	a	significant	section	of	our	
people	who	do	not	as	yet	have	access	to	potable	water.	
In	Ghana,	urban	water	coverage	is	currently	estimated	at	63%	while	rural	water	coverage	
stands	at	64%.	Government’s	long-term	objective	in	water	provision	is	to	guarantee	
universal	access	by	2025.	In	the	short	term,	however,	we	are	working	to	increase	urban
water	coverage	from	the	current	level	to	85%	by	2015	while	taking	rural	water	coverage	to	
76%	within	the	same	period.
The	Greater	Accra	Metropolitan	Area	alone	accounts	for	60%	of	the	total	urban	water	
supply	in	the	country.		By	2015,	its	projected	daily demand	will	be	150	million	gallons.	Total	
water	production	from	the	Kpong	and	Weija	treatment	plants,	which	supply	the	area,	
stands	at	only	93	million	gallons	per	day.	This	leaves	a	shortfall	of	57	million	gallons	each	
day.	
To	bridge	this	gap	four	key	projects	are	currently	ongoing	and	will	deliver	a	total	of	65.3	
Million	Gallons	of	water	per	day	to	the	existing	production	capacity.	Between	this	year	and	
2015,	the	total	water	supply	to	the	Greater	Accra	Metropolitan	Area	will	increase	to	158.3	
Million	Gallons	of	water	per	day,	enough	to	tackle	the	water	demands	in	the	area	by	the	
end	of	2015.	This	will	end	the	water	starvation	in	the	Northern	part	of	the	city.		Adenta,	
Haatso,	Agbogba,	Madina	and	all	others	will	receive	water.
53
Mr.	Speaker,	the	projects	are	the	Kpong	water	supply	expansion	project,	Kpong	intake	
rehabilitation	project,	Accra-Tema	metropolitan	area	water	supply	project	and	the	TeshieNungua
desalination	water	project.	
Mr.	Speaker,	there	are	dozens	of	other	water	projects	at	various	stages of	completion	
around	the	country	which	would	add	about	30	million	Gallons	of	water	per	day	to	the	
existing	production	capacity.	
Mr.	Speaker,	a	number	of	projects	intended	to	make	water	available	to	rural	dwellers	were	
vigorously	pursued	in	2013,	including	the	Damanko-Kpassa	Water	Supply	Project,	which	will	
serve	about	60,000	inhabitants	in	13	communities	in	the	Nkwanta	North	District	of	the	
Volta	Region.	
Under	the	COCOBOD	borehole	project,	over	one	thousand	boreholes	were	sunk	to	serve	
300,000	people,	and	under	the	Northern	Regional	Small	Water	and	Sanitation	Project,	
125,000	inhabitants	in	14	Districts	are	been	targeted.		Mr.	Speaker	these	interventions	
coupled	with	other	initiatives	across	the	country	have	firmly	put	Ghana	on	the	way	to	
achieving	the	MDG	goals	on	water.
e.		Housing
Mr.	Speaker,	available	data	puts	the	housing	deficit	in	Ghana	at	a	staggering	1.7million	
housing	units.	There	are	a	number	of	interventions	ongoing	to	help	reduce	the	deficit.	
Work	has	commenced	on	a	5,000	units	project	at	Ningo	in	the	Greater	Accra	Region.	This	is	
part	of	what	is	billed	to	be	a	9,120	unit	affordable	housing	complex.	
The	quest	to	tackle	the	housing	deficit	is	being	handled	not	as	a100%	government	financed	
project	but	through	various	forms	of	private	sector participation.	Another	set	of	15,000	
affordable	units	will	be	constructed	over	the	next	five	years	in	Nsakina,	Odumase,	Kpone	
and	Borteyman.
54
I	have,	following	discussions	with	some	members	of	the	Ghana	Real	Estate	Developers	
Association	(GREDA),	directed	the	Minister	for	Lands	and	Natural	Resources,	and	his	
colleague	at	the	Water	Resources,	Works	and	Housing	to	discuss	with	the	association	a	
proposal	for	their	contribution	and	involvement	in	the	construction	of	affordable	houses.
Mr.	Speaker,	let	me	add	that	various	state	agencies	have	been	tasked	to	finance	and	
complete	the	projects	abandoned	by	the	Kufuor	administration.	The	Tema	Development	
Corporation	(TDC)	is	working	on	buildings	at	the	Kpone	site	while	the	Social	Security	and	
National	Insurance	Trust	(SSNIT)	has	taken	over	the	construction	of	the	units	at	Boteyman,	
Asokore-Mampong	in	Kumasi,	Koforidua,	Tamale	and	Wa.
f.		Communications	
Mr	Speaker,	information	and	communication	technology	can	improve	the	quality	of	life	of	
our	citizenry.		Just	think	of	all	the	ways	we	now	use	our	mobile	phones.			In	a	relatively	
short	period	of	time,	this	technology	has	become	one	of	the	most	indispensable	tools	of	
trade,	health,	banking,	financial	services,	money	transfer,	social	networking,	and	education	
as	well	as	skills	training.	
In	the	face	of	global	economic	challenges,	this	sector	in	Ghana	continues	to	register	
improved	growth,	contributing	about	24.7%	to	the	Service	Sector’s	share	of	GDP	last	year.		
Due	in	part	to	an	enabling	and	improved	operating	environment,	infrastructural	expansion	
and	sustained	competition,	telephone	subscriptions	for	both	mobile	and	fixed	access	lines	
increased	by	10.5%	over	the	2012	figure	of	over	25	million.	Last	year,	the	sector	recorded	a	
total	of	about	28	million	access	lines	representing	a	penetration	rate	of	107.5%	with	mobile	
telephony	accounting	for	106%,	representing	over	27	million	subscribers.
55
Mr.	Speaker,	to	further	expand	access	to	broadband	infrastructure	for	increased	Internet	
access	in	the	country,	the	construction	of	the	Eastern	Corridor	Fibre	Optic	network	
commenced	last	year	and	so	far	107km	of	fibre	out	of	the	780km	stretch	has	been	laid.
PILLAR	IV:		MAINTAINING	TRANSPARENT	AND	ACCOUNTABLE	GOVERNANCE	
Mr.	Speaker,	the	most	formidable	pillar	of	our	transition	to middle-income	status	is	our	
enviable	and	deepening	record	of	constitutional	governance	and	rule	of	law.		In	the	past	
year,	Ghana	has	demonstrated,	beyond	every	shred	of	doubt,	the	resilience	of	our	
democracy.	Together	we	are	knitting	the	fabric	of	an	inclusive,	united	and	tolerant	society.	
Together	we	are	moving	forward	on	the	path	of	democratic	consolidation.	
In	the	past	year	I	have	sought	to	conduct	a	participatory	and	transparent	administration	by	
consulting	regularly	with	selected	interest	groups	to	interact	and	share	ideas	with	them	on	
Government	policy	and	to	receive	their	input	on	issues	of	concern	to	them.	I	have	met	with	
religious	and	traditional	leaders,	with	youth	groups,	persons	with	disability,	women’s	
groups,	civil	society	organizations,	anti-corruption	coalition,	market	traders	associations	
and	several	others	too	numerous	to	mention.
I	will	continue	these	interactions	with	the	good	people	of	Ghana	in	order	to	get	better	
sense	of	their	needs	and,	from	their	own	mouths,	to	gain	an	understanding	of	how	they	
feel	Government	is	or	is	not	fully	meeting	its	mandate	to	represent	their	needs.	
The	judiciary	also	remains	a	strong	ally	in	our	fight	against	crime,	and	the	promotion	of	
rule	of	law.	I	wish	to	place	on	record	again	that	Government	is	committed	to	deepening	
collaboration	among	the	various	arms	of	government	in	our	collective	desire	to	build	a	
stronger	nation	that	truly	respects	law	and	order.
a.	Combating	Corruption
Mr.	Speaker,	we	will	aggressively	continue	the	fight	against	corruption.	Corruption	erodes	
national	resources	and	deprives	Government of	the	capacity	to	invest	in	our	people.	I	wish	
to	restate	my	unwavering	commitment	to	continue	an	unrelenting	battle	against	
corruption.	We	will	fight	this	battle	on	two	fronts.	Firstly	to	put	in	place	the	measures	to	
prevent	corruption,	and	secondly	to	pursue	and	punish	corruption	wherever	it	occurs.
56
Mr.	Speaker,	in	the	past	year	our	commitment	to	the	fight	against	corruption	has	been	
manifested	in	the	actions	we	have	taken.	We	set	up	the	Sole	Commissioner	office	to	
investigate	cases	of	Judgement	debt.	We	eagerly	await	his	report	and	would	work	with	it	
to	ensure	that	we	get	rid	of	this	huge	drain	on	our	public	resources.
While	we	await	the	completion	of	work	by	the	Sole	Commissioner	for	further	action,	I	have	
asked	the	Attorney	General	to	vigorously	defend	all	actions	brought	against	the	state.	In	
this	regard,	Government	has	successfully	defended	claims	filed	against	the	government	
both	within	and	outside	Ghana,	thereby	halting	payment	of	sums	in	excess	of	GHC1	billion.
Last	year	we	set	up	investigative committees	to	look	into	various	allegations	of	corruption.	
We	published	their	reports	and	the	Attorney	General	and	EOCO	are	proceeding	to	act	on	
the	outcome	of	their	investigation.
We	completed	and	launched	a	Code	of	Ethics	for	public	office	holders.	This	code	provides	
guidance	to	public	officers	in	matters	such	as	conflict	of	interest,	abuse	of	office,	modesty	
etc.	
Mr.	Speaker,	I	also	announced	supplementary	measures	to	stem	corruption,	including	the	
cancellation	of	the	convention	of	being	able	to	purchase	one’s	official	car	or	residence	at	
the	end	of	one’s	public	service.
We	have	embarked	on	a	registration	exercise	of	Government	vehicles	in	order	to	prevent	
their	misuse	or	theft.
I	have	made	submission	of	reports	of	Audit	Reports	Implementation	Committees	(ARICS)	a	
part	of	the	performance	criteria	of	Ministers	and	their	Chief	Directors.
57
I	have	asked	the	AG	to	pursue	prosecution	of	persons	indicted	in	audit	reports	for	the	
misappropriation	of	public	funds.
For	more	transparency	in	procurement	we	have directed	for	sole	sourcing	applications	to	
be	justified	to	Cabinet	by	Ministries,	Departments	and	Agencies	(MDAs)	before	submission	
to	the	Public	Procurement	Authority	(PPA).
Mr.	Speaker,	we	have	presented	many	pieces	of	anticorruption	legislation	to	this	house	
for	your	consideration.	The	National	Anti-corruption	Action	Plan	and	Strategy	has	been	laid	
before	Parliament,	as	part	of	a	series	of	anti-corruption	legislation,	including,	the	AntiMoney
Laundering	(Amendment)	Bill,	2013;	the	Conduct	of	Public	Officers	Bill,	2013;	the	
Whistle	Blowers	(Amendment)	Bill	and	the	Right	to	Information	Bill.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	existence	of	corruption	in	the	system	must	not	be	a	political	baton	that	
we	drudge	up	every	few	years	to	clobber	one	another	with.	Corruption	is	a problem	that	
begins	and	ends	with	one	government;	it	is	pervasive	and	virtually	institutionalized.	It	does	
not	help	to	segment	corruption	because	it	does	not	segment	the	harm	that	it	does.		It	
hurts	society	as	a	whole,	so	must	fight	it	as	a	whole.		The	Attorney	General	has	received	my	
full	encouragement	and	support	to	deal	firmly	with	cases	of	corruption	no	matter	whose	
watch	the	acts	occurred	under.	
b.		Law	and	Order
Mr.	Speaker,	indiscipline	and	lawlessness	are	fast	infecting	the	fabric	of	our	society in	the	
form	of	encroachment	of	public	lands,	sale	of	the	same	plot	of	land	to	multiple	buyers,	
armed	land	guards	wreaking	violence	on	innocent	people.	All	these	problems	are	
becoming	endemic	in	our	society	and	are	being	exacerbated	by	growing	urbanization.	
58
Part	of	the	problem	is	associated	with	the	negligence	of	heads	of	public	institutions	whose	
mandate	it	is	to	regulate	these	practices.		In	some	cases,	these	very	institutions	condone	
and	connive	with	the	offenders,	thereby	appearing	to	provide	legitimacy	to	their	actions.
Recently,	there	has	been	a	spate	of	demolitions,	some	ordered	by	the	courts	and	others	
carried	out	by	state	agencies	to	evict	squatters	or	encroachers	from	public	lands.	
Ultimately,	these	demolitions	create	hardship	for	our	citizens.	Public	institutions	have	a	
responsibility	to	act	in	a	timely	manner	in	protecting	state-owned	lands,	and	must	do	so.		It	
doesn’t	help	to	sleep	on	one’s	rights	only	to	suddenly	awake	one	day	and	seek	to	enforce	
those	rights	by	measures	as	drastic	as	demolition.	
I	have	tasked	the	Ministry	of	Interior,	Ministry	of	Local	Government	and	the	Ministry	of	
Lands	and	Natural	Resources	to	develop	guidelines	to	regulate	demolitions	that	are	in	
conformity	with	the	laws	and	statutes	in	such	a	way	that	they	respect	the	rights	of	citizens	
and	at	the	same	time	hold	relevant	public	institutions	culpable	for	their	inactions	at	the	
outset	of	the	problem.	We	will	strengthen	our	public	institutions	to	make	them	more	
transparent	and	client-friendly.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	fight	against	crime	is	being	prosecuted	vigorously	by	our	security	
services.	In	pursuit	of	this,	the	Ghana	Police	Service,	with	the	approval	of	Government	
introduced	Visibility	&	Accessibility	Patrols	alongside	Community	Policing,	Tent	City	
Systems	and	Street	Policing	Strategies.	The	Formed	Police	Unit	was	also	established	to	
deal	with	public	order	management.	I	am	happy	to	report	that	there	has	been	a	steady	
reduction	in	crime	with	the	introduction	of	the	Police	Visibility	Patrol	in	the	main	
metropolises	of	Accra,	Tema	and	Kumasi.		The	Patrol’s	presence	has	also	positively	
impacted	the	flow	of	vehicular	traffic	in	those	cities.	These	initiatives	were	meant	to	bring	
the	services	of	the	Police	closer	to	the	people	and	will	be	extended	nationwide.		
59
Mr.	Speaker,	to	improve	the	capacity	of	security	agencies	to	provide	internal	security	for	
human	safety	and	protection,	Government	has	facilitated	the	establishment	of	a	Police	
Command	and	Staff	College	in	Winneba	and recruited	3,000	personnel	with	1,900	of	them	
in	training	at	the	various	Police	Training	Schools	across	the	country. This	has	led	to	the	
improvement	in	Police	Population	Ratio	(PPR)	from	1:824	in	2012	to	1:747	in	2013	as	
compared	to	1:1100	in	2010.	This	has	as	brought	us	closer	to	the	United	Nations’	benchmark	
of 1:500	(PPR).	Currently,	the	strength	of	the	Service	has	increased	from	29,117	in	2012	to	
32,117.	Government	has	acquired	2	mobile	clinic	vans,	6	marine	police	speedboats,	14	
“Maverick”	armoured	vehicles	and	some	communication	equipment	to	aid	operations.	The	
police	have	also	received	more	than	a	1000	vehicles	to	enhance	their	mobility.	
Mr.	Speaker,	high	on	the	government’s	priority	is	the	fight	against	the	trafficking	in	and	
use	of	illicit	drugs.	Beyond	taking	steps	to	improve	public	education,	our	security	agencies	
have	stepped	up	their	operations	to	fight	against	the	abuse	of,	and	trafficking	in	narcotics.	
Last	year,	NACOB	facilitated	the arrest	of	traffickers,	and	seizure	of	several	kilograms	of	
various	illicit	drugs	and	psychotropic	substances	including	a	recent	case	of	414kg	of	
cocaine	with	an	approximate	street	value	of	115million	cedis.	As	part	of	our	strategy	to	
arrest	the	drug	menace,	the	NACOB	has	been	facilitated	to	open	8	additional	regional	
offices,	for	which	they	have	recruited	250	personnel	who	are	currently	undergoing	
training.
Government	has	also	initiated	a	draft	Narcotics	Control	Commission’s	Bill	to	replace	PNDCL	
236,	which	established	the	Narcotics	Control	Board	(NACOB).	
Mr	Speaker,	Ghanaians	have	proven	time	and	time	again	that	we	are	a	peaceful	and	
harmonious	people	with	no	desire	or	tolerance	for	war	or	violence.		Even	as	our	
neighbours	were	engaged	in	civil	unrest	and	bloodshed	for	lengthy	periods,	we	did	not	
allow	it	to	spill	over	into	our	land.		Within	our	borders	there	existed	peace.
Government	will	do	everything	possible	to	ensure	that	this	continues	to	be	the	case.		We	
will	work	with	the	National	Peace	Council	to	ensure	a	resolution	of	conflicts	and	bring	
60
lasting	peace	to	areas	that	have	been	going	through	conflict.	We	will	continue	to	support	
NPC	to	deliver	on	its	mandate.
Mr	Speaker,	our	Armed	Forces	continue	to	earn	praise	for	their	professionalism	and	
performance	both	within	the	country	and	abroad	at	the	peacekeeping	missions	to	which	
they	are	deployed.	Despite	the	esteem in	which	our	Forces	are	held,	Mr	Speaker,	the	
equipment	and	logistic	situation	of	the	Armed	Forces	was	pathetic.	Lack	of	airplanes	and	
helicopters;	lack	of	naval	vessels;	lack	of	APCs,	IFVs,	and	engineering	equipment	forced	our	
men	and	women	in	uniform	to become	the	most	ingenious	improvisers	you	could	ever	
find.	
Mr.	Speaker	this	situation	has	dramatically	changed.	Our	waters	are	kept	safe	from	pirates	
because	the	Navy	has	received	7	new	vessels.	The	Air	Force	role	in	ensuring	national	
security	and	safety	has	been	enhanced	by	the	acquisition	of	CASA	Troop	transport	
Aircrafts,	Diamond	surveillance	and	patrol	aircrafts,	MI	17	heavy	lift	helicopters,	and	new	
Hangars	for	maintenance	work.	
The	responsibilities	of	our	Forces	continue	to	increase.	Apart	from	engagement	in	
peacekeeping	theatres	in	Lebanon,	DRC,	Liberia,	Sierra	Leone	and	Mali,	we	recently	have	
been	requested	to	deploy	for	air	operations	in	Mali,	and	also	to	deploy	850	troops	as	part	
of	the	UN	mission	in	South	Sudan.	
Mr	Speaker,	we	are	proud	of	the	valiant	men	and	women	who	serve	Ghana	and	the	world,	
on	behalf	of	this	nation,	and	Government	is	committed	to	doing	what	it	can	to	make	sure	
they	are	able	to	conduct	their	service	more	safely	and	efficiently,	in	attire	that	is	
appropriate	and	an	atmosphere	that	is	befitting.
c.		Parliament
61
Mr	Speaker,	Ghana	enjoys	substantial	praise	both	nationally	and	internationally,	and	has	
earned	an	enviable	reputation	as	a	burgeoning	democracy	in	large	part	because	of	our	
strong	Parliament.		The	Parliament	of	the	Republic	of	Ghana	has	led	the	way	in	groundbreaking
procedures	and	practices,	becoming	the	hub	of	many	Parliamentary	Networks.	
Strengthening	Parliament	is	therefore	crucial	to	strengthening	our	democracy.	
Mr.	Speaker,	I	will	continue	to	work	to	enhance	the	dignity	and	respect	of	this	august	
house.	We	need	to	work	closely	to	strengthen	public	input	in	the	legislative	process.		After	
years	of	delay,	I	am	pleased	that	Members	of	Parliament	would	soon	have	decent	offices	
from	which	to	conduct	their	business. The	days	of	using	our	car	trunks	to	conduct	business	
will	finally	be	a	thing	of	the	past.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	Constitutional	Review	Implementation	Committee	has	been	working	hard	
to	fulfil	the	mandate	given	them.	It	is	my	hope	that	at	the	appropriate	time	this	house	will	
lend	its	unalloyed	support	to	achieve	the	objectives	of	the	Constitutional	Review	exercise.
Mr.	Speaker,	work	will	commence	on	the	reconfiguration	of	the	Chamber	to	accommodate	
the	increased	number	of	MPs	to	275	for	effective	legislative	work.
d.		Deepening	Centralization
Mr.	Speaker,	Ghana's	decentralization	process	has	been	acclaimed	across	Africa	as	one	of	
the	most	far-reaching	in	the	continent.		We	have	continued	to	deepen	administrative	
decentralization	and	made	significant	headway	in	the	areas	of	Fiscal	Decentralization.
By	putting	more	power	in	the	hands	of	our	people	at	the	local	government	level,	we	would	
be	empowering	our	people	to	take	their	destinies	into	their	hands.	It	will	make	us	better	
able	to	handle	the	enormous	issues	of	sanitation	and	pollution	that	are	threatening	to	
engulf	us.	This	will	enhance	efficient	use	of	national	resources	and	give	our	people	a	better	
stake	in	the	progress	of	our	nation.
62
e.		Foreign	Policy
Mr.	Speaker,	Ghana’s	foreign	policy	has	assumed	prominence	in	the	area	of	peacekeeping.		
We	are	getting	more	engaged	in	advancing	regional	integration	at	the	West	Africa	and	
continental	levels.	In	2013,	we	were	instrumental	in	the	successful	efforts	of	ECOWAS	and	
the	international	community	to	achieve	a	peaceful	resolution	of	the	conflict	in	Mali.		
We	continue	to	be	actively	engaged	in	several	other	peacekeeping	initiatives	in	the	region	
and	around	the	world.		Our	people	have	provided	us	full	support	for	these	initiatives,	and	
our	citizens	are	proud	to	belong	to	a	nation	that	helps	in	the	resolution	of	conflicts	and	the	
promotion	of	democracy	across	our	continent.		
Mr	Speaker,	as	the	focus	of	my	Government	is	on	the	transformation	of	our	economic	
structure,	we	are	actively	engaged	with	our	neighbours	in	strengthening	regional	
integration.		A	key	part	of	this	agenda	relates	to	the	very	themes	I	have	enumerated	for	
our	domestic	economic	growth,	namely:	strategic	infrastructure;	energy;	improved	
governance;	and	employment.		
Ghana	will	continue	to	champion	regional	integration	and	African	unity.	We	see	the	
transformation	of	Ghana's	economic	structure	as	deeply	linked	to	the	emergence	and	
fortunes	of	a	viable	West	African	market,	with	an	overall	population	of	more	than	250	
million	people.
Mr	Speaker,	most	nations have	accelerated	their	development	and	transformation	by	
harnessing	the	contributions	of	their	Diaspora.		People	of	African	descent	made	key	
contributions	towards	Ghana’s	independence	and	Ghana	continues	to	benefit	from	the	
contributions	of	Ghanaians	and	non-Ghanaians	in	the	Diaspora.	
The	Ministry	of	Foreign	Affairs	and	Regional	Integration	has	now	established	a	fullyfledged
Bureau	for	Diaspora	Affairs,	as	a	national	platform	for	Diaspora	engagement,	
migration	and	development.		This	new	outfit	possesses the	enhanced	capacity	as	well	as	
63
the	mandate	to	coordinate	the	work	of	stakeholder	institutions	and	mainstream	their	
contribution	into	our	national	development	agenda.	
Many	hundreds of	highly	experienced	and	qualified	Ghanaians	who	have	recently	retired	
from	the	UN	system,	for	example,	are	also	standing	by	to	assist	us	in	our	transition	to	
middle-income	status.	
These	are	refreshing	new	directions	that	our	foreign	policy	will	begin	to	address,	as	we	
embark	on	this	journey	of	transformation.
CONCLUSION
Mr Speaker,	in	order	for	it	to	be	thorough	and	successful,	this	transformation	will	require	
the	support	and	participation	of	all	Ghanaians.		
In	2013	during	my	year’s-end	meeting	with	the	Council	of	State,	various	members	were	
bemoaning	what	seems	to	be	a	fallen	sense	of	selflessness	and	patriotism	within	our	
society.		We	discussed	at	length	the	topic	of	responsible	citizenship	and	wondered	
whether	that	value	had	somehow	been	lost	to	the	political	divide	that	has	swallowed	so	
much	of	what	once	joined	us	together.
My	first	inclination	is	to	believe	that	it	has	not.		It	is	to	believe	that	Ghanaians	are,	at	our	
core,	the	same	people	we	were	on	March	6,	1957	when	we	became	a	free	nation.		I	am	
inclined	to	believe	that	those	traits	and	values	that	led	us	to	our	liberation	back	then	were	
passed	down,	as	gifts,	from	one	generation	of	Ghanaians	to	the	next.
Mr	Speaker,	I	began	this	address	by	stating	that	today,	as	I	talked	about	where	we	are	as	a	
nation,	I	also	wanted	to	talk	about	who	we	are	as	a	nation.		Ask	any Ghanaian	what	it	
means	to	be	from	this	country,	what	it	means	to	be	“Made	in	Ghana”	so	to	speak,	and	she	
or	he	will	respond	with	pride.		
64
I	have	witnessed	it	time	and	time	again,	the	pride	with	which	we	talk	about	our	homeland,	
whether	we	are	mentioning	our	leading	role	in	Africa’s	independence	or	our	leading	role	as	
UN	peacekeepers	since	the	inception	of	the	programme.		When	we	talk	about	Ghana	there	
is	so	much	to	share	from	our	rich	culture	and	numerous	languages,	from	our	foods	and	
folklore,	from	our	music	and	dance,	and	from	our	heritage	and	traditions.	
Mr.	Speaker,	there	is	a	reason	why	day	after	day,	flights	destined	for	Ghana	are	filled	to	
capacity	with	tourists	and	volunteers	and	NGO	workers.		There	is	a	reason	why	so	many	
black	people	in	the	Diaspora	with	no	immediate	Ghanaian	lineage	rename	themselves	
Kwame,	Kofi,	and	Kwasi	or	Adwoa,	Abena	and	Afia.
Mr	Speaker,	the	world	loves	Ghana	because	we	love	Ghana.		But	the	instant	we	allow	
ourselves	to	fall	prey	to	the	pettiness	of	politics	and	the	small-mindedness	of	doomsayers	
and	people	who	actively	wish	for	the	failure	of	any	action	or	policy	intended	to	lift	Ghana	
up,	we	turn	our	backs	on	that	love	and	in	so	doing,	we	betray	our	own	homeland.
Ghana	is	bigger	than	any	of	us.	She	is	bigger	than	any	of	our	political	parties..		Ghana	
belongs	to	its	people.		Ghana	belongs	to	the	members	in	the	74,000	households	who	will	
now	be	able	to	eat	because	of	the	cash	assistance	given	to	them	by	LEAP.		Ghana	belongs	
to	the	children	who	are	now	able	to	attend	school,	the	new	teachers	who	are	now	being	
trained,	the	villagers	who	now	have	potable	water	to	drink.
Ghana	belongs	to	our	Black	Stars	and	Black	Queens	and	other	representatives	in	the	arena	
of	sports.		Ghana	belongs	to	its	business	leaders,	entrepreneurs	and its	enterprising	young	
people	who	are	creating	jobs	and	working	to	strengthen	our	economy,	innovate	people	
like	those	seated	in	this	house	today:		Kate	Papafio	of	Reroy	Cables,	Frank	Adu	of	CalBank,	
Michael	Hinaku	of	Beige	Capital,	Alhaji	Mohammed	Agbeve	of	Agbeve	Herbal,	Tony	
Senayah	of	Horseman	Shoes,	Magnus	Nunoo	of	Sachet	and	Bottled	Water	Producers	and	
many,	many	more	like	them.			
65
But	most	of	all,	Ghana	belongs	to	you,	the	people	who	get	up	every	day	and	do	their	best	
to	earn	a	living,	to	maintain	your	household,	to	feed	and	educate	your	children,	to	care	for	
your	elders,	and	to	be	a	functional	part	of	your	communities.	
Your	love	of	this	country	matters.
Your	service	to	this	country	makes	a	difference.
Mr.	Speaker,	I	must	believe	that	we	are	still	a	patriotic	society	with	citizens	who	feel	a	
sense	of	responsibility	to	their	nation.	
Mr.	Speaker,	we	must	all	rise	to	the	challenge	of	transforming	Ghana—because	if	not	us,	
then	who?
We	cannot	falter	and	we	must	not	be	afraid	because	God	is	on	our	side, and	the	holy	book	
says	“If	God	be	for	us,	who	can	be	against	us”
I	thank	you	for	your	kind	attention.
END